, 


1 


I 


COMPRISING 


BISHOP    KEITH'S 

of  ^cottisij  Bisljops 


ENLARGED;  WITH 


TiEEVES'   AND    GOODALL'S 

on  tljt 


REV.   J.   F.    S.   GORDON,   D.D 

ST.   ANDREWS,  GLASGOW. 


Dolunu  ii. 


GLASGOW:    JOHN   TWEED.     MDCCCLXYII. 


v 


James   Sharp,  A  D.I 6 62 


SCOTICHROXICON. 


ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS 

(CONTINUED). 

LI.  JAMES  SHARP.     A.D.  1CC1-70. 

As  a  specimen  of  the  prejudice,  untruth,  and  scurrility  which 
such  Historians  as  Wodrow,  Burnet,  Crookshank,  Burns,  M'Crie, 
&c.,  with  Encyclopediasts  who  have  copied  their  very  words,  have 
heaped  upon  the  memory  of  this  Prelate,  the  sequel  is  here 
given.  It  is  from  a  Pamphlet,  ashamed  to  own  its  Author,  who 
is  said  to  have  heen  one  Hamilton  of  Kinkell,  but  honoured  as 
one  of  the  Miscellanea  Scotiea,  purporting  to  be  a  "Life  of  James 
Sharp,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews — first  Printed  in  1078 ;  to 
which  is  now  added  an  Account  of  his  Death  by  an  Eye-Wit 
ness,"  reprinted  in  Glasgow,  1818,  for  John  Wylie  &  Co.,  by  R. 
Chapman.  This  Brochure  opens  with  "The  Epistle  Dedicatory" 
to  the  Archbishop,  beginning  thus:  "Mr.  Sharp, — I  thought  I 
could  not  do  any  thing  more  pertinently,  than  to  make  this 
Work  as  well  objectively  as  it  is  already  subjectively  yours,  .  . 
.  being  indeed  another  sort  of  a  man  than  an  honest  man,— 
which  I  am  confident  none  will  attribute  unto  you,  except  your 
own  wife,  who,  if  you  be  her  honest  man,  I  am  sure  you  are  to 
all  others  some  other  thing,  which  I  need  not  name."  Having 
thus  commenced,  this  "honoured"  Composition  goes  on  to  say : 

VOL.   II.  A 


2  AECHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

"To  give  life  to  this  History,  it  wore  fit  we  know  the  parents 
who  gave  life  to  this  man.  .  .  .  As  the  name  and  memory 
of  William  Sharp  and  Isohel  Lcsly  should  have  died  with  them, 
if  they  had  not  boon  mentioned  in  the  Life  of  this  their  wicked 
son,  so  we  think  the  History  of  his  Life  shall  give  little  honour 
to  their  memory.  Of  whom  only  it  can  he  said,  that  they  were 
the  means  to  bring  into  the  world  a  man  abhorred  of  God ;  and 
a  man  that  when  we  call  him  perjured  apostate,  a,  traitor  to 
Christ  and  His  Church,  and  a  persecutor  thereof,  or  what  else 
may  lie  said  of  him,  we  do  not  exhaust  all  his  wickedness ;  so 
that  God  only  can  search  out  his  wickedness,  till  He  find  none, 
and  punish  him  condignly  for  the  same. 

"  But  as  for  his  father,  William  Sharp,  wo  shall  give  this 
short  account  of  him,  that  he  was  the  son  of  a  piper,  who  was 
only  famous  for  his  skill  in  that  spring  called  1 '//.  Ph.  7V/.  7V/. 

v  J_  O 

f.W/V.  But  although  the  grandfather  had  been  less  skilful  in 
his  calling  (of  which  we  find  little  use,  but  to  induce  wantonness 
and  obscenity),  and  although  springs  tunes'  had  given  no  price, 
yet  we  think  it  had  been  more  for  the  advantage  of  the  Church, 
at  least  it  should  have  received  less  detriment,  if  the  grandchild 
had  been  bound  his  apprentice,  and  had  been  rather  a  Piper  than 
a  Prelate.  But  we  might  have  wanted  both  the  one  and  the 
other.  Pipers  and  Prelates  agree  well  together  for  the  service  of 
their  belly.  God  cannot  be  enough  promoted  without  such  in 
struments  as  blow  up  their  lusts;  but  if  the  pipe  and  bags  be  yet 
in  the  Prelate's  possession  (which  belongs  to  him  as  eldest  son 
to  his  father,  and  so  heir  by  progress  to  his  grandfather),  it  is 
like  he  may  now  have  use  for  them,  to  gift  them  to  some  landart 
Church,  to  save  the  expenses  of  a  pair  of  organs ;  which  may  do 
well  enough  for  our  rude  people,  who  can  sing  as  well  to  the  one 
as  to  the  other.  And  if  instrumental  music  in  the  Service  of  God 
1)Q  juris  Divini  (as  the  Prelates  highly  assert),  it  cannot  be  thought 
that  any  people  should  be  so  fanatick  as  to  admit  the  organs  in 
Divine  Service  and  refuse  the  bagpipe,  especially  it  being  the 
Prelate's  gift,  and  all  the  heirship  goods  that  he  had  of  his  grand 
father,  which  he  would  so  freely  bestow  upon  the  Church. 

"  But  William  Sharp  finding  more  wind  than  money  in  his 


JAMES  bllAIll3. 


father's  bags,  afior  his  Death  he  resolves  not  to  seek  his  liveli 
hood  by  so  airy  an  employment  as  that  which  his  father  had 
followed,  observing1,  that  although  he  had  the  heart  to  make 
others  merry,  yet  he  himself  was  sometimes  sad ;  and  that  the 
lightness  of  his  purse  made  his  heart  heavy;  finding  the  Proverb 
verilied  in  him,  '  That  what  comes  by  the  wind  goes  by  the  water,' 
for  what  ho  wan  by  his  pipes  he  *  at  the  walls.  .  .  . 

Although  his  mother  j 
was  in  quality  a  gentle 
woman,  yet  she  was 
forced  to  make  a  virtue 
of  necessity,  and  to 
learn  the  art  of  brew 
ing  ;  which  qualified 
her  to  set  up  in  Dun, 
which  proved  such  a 
subsidiary  help  for 
maintenance  of  the 
family,  as  that  Wil 
liam's  pens  .'having 
become,  as  the  Nar 
rative  says,  Lord  Find- 
later's  clerk :  should 
never  have  winged  his 
sons,  to  have  raised 
them  out  of  the  dust, 
if  they  had  not  been 
feathered  out  of  La 
bel's  jegg  purse,  which 

Sharp's  Seal  has  upon  it   S.  Andrew  holding  his   i  v    i  p.,    f.l,nmrp    nvnn 

1  1  'Jl          T     •  1        <-j        1  1  1  1\  •  •  1      •  •       1      ;  *-*    7  1J.OX  «^llCtJ.ai^Vy          J-lltlill- 

Lross  with  las  Iclt  hand,  ami  a  Crosier  in  his  right.        . 

The  Family  Shield  is  below.     On  each  side  of  the  tamed      her      SOUS      at 

Apostle  is  a  triple  Scroll,  on  the  lirst  part  of  which  is  schools,      sllO      keeping 

the  Legend,  Sacrat^Ecdi      ;  Den.    Reyi ;    on  the  it  untn  ^  d        Qf  h 
second.  Ausincio  (Jar.  11.,  ticclesta  instmirata.  J 

Death." 

This  "Life"  of  Archbishop  Sharp  meanders  throughout  in 
this  strain,  retailing  the  fabrication  of  Isobel  Lindsay  and  her 
adulterous  bastard,  Murdered  and  Buried  by  the  Bishop  below 


i      AHCHBI SHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDEEWS. 

the  hearth- stone ;  not  omitting  the  "  B  ranks,"  and  her  repeated 
interruptions  of  the  Bishop  while  in  the  Pulpit.  The  B ranks  are 
a  gag  which  was  commonly  used  at  that  period,  over  Great  Bri 
tain,  for  Scoltl*.  The  Beadle  of  the  Parish  Church  of  St.  Andrews 
exhibits  this  Appurtenance  to  visitors.  Very  probably  Bell  Lind 
say  required  to  wear  it,  although  it  was  not  made  for  her  express 
use.  It  is  shaped  like  a  helmet,  goes  over  the  head,  is  made  of 
iron  bars,  with  a  piece  for  keeping  down  the  tongue,  and  was 
padlocked  behind. 

"When  lies  so  patent  as  to  the  Archbishop's  parentage,  Arc., 
can  be  handed  down  from  one  Historiographer  to  another,  any 
unprejudiced  Header  may  reflect  on  the  moral  weight  and  credit 
which  are  due  to  such  champions  as  those  named  at  the  outset, 
who  wield  the  dagger  of  calumny,  but  who  so  miss  their  footing 
as  to  fall  ingloriously  on  the  dunghill  of  disdain,  the  lit  seat  of 
honour  for  all  traducers. 

The  most  recently  Printed  Notice  of  Archbishop  Sharp  occurs 
in  the  Xurth  Jlritixh  lievieir,  No.  XCIL,  Article  V.,  June,  1867. 
It  is  worth  reading,  although  besprinkled  with  unjustifiable 
asperities,  especially  at  pp.  399,  405,  420;  albeit  a  candid  con 
fession  is  made  (p.  399,  /.  22),  "  It  is  plain  on  a  glance  that  the 
popular  Presbyterian  yiew  of  him  is  not  correct."  Alluding  to 
the  Lamlcrdak  Papers  in  the  British  Museum  (p.  405,  /.  27),  the 
Writer  avers,  "To  ourselves,  we  confess  that  they  incline  the 
balance  in  Sharp's  favour.  They  have  left  upon  us  the  impres 
sion  that,  whatever  his  faults  were,  he  was  not  a  traitor  to  his 
friends  and  to  his  Church,  in  the  sense  in  which  he  is  represented 
to  have  been  so  by  contemporary  authorities,  and  by  the  train  of 
Presbyterian  Writers  who  have  followed  them."  As  to  the  scan 
dalous  story  in  the  Pamphlet  of  1678,  of  the  beautiful  serving- 
woman,  Isobel  Lindsay,  at  a  public  change  kept  by  one  John 
Allan,  at  whose  house  Sharp  lodged  when  he  first  came  to  St. 
Andrews,  the  Writer  observes  (p.  409,  410),  "He  is  said  to  have 
deceived  her  by  a  promise  of  Marriage,  and  then  to  have  strangled 
her  child,  burying  it  '  under  the  hearth-stone,  where  probably  its 
bones  may  yet  be  found  !'  The  story  was  well  conceived  to  touch 
the  popular  mind,  and  fill  it  with  horror.  It  has  that  dash  of 


JAMES  SHARP.  5 

dark  romance  in  it  which  goes  right  to  the  popular  imagination. 
Happily  it  does  not  rest  upon  a  particle  of  real  evidence.  All 
the  admitted  circumstances  of  Sharp's  residence  in  St.  Andrews 
are  broadly  against  it.  .  .  .  The  Covenanting  caricaturist 
has  here,  as  in  some  other  cases,  drawn  a  picture  too  monstrous 
for  belief.  The  whole  foundation  of  the  story  seems  to  have 
been  certain  ravings  of  a  woman  of  the  same  name,  long  after 
Sharp  became  Archbishop,  —  a  fanatical  enthusiast,  'crack- 
brained  and  fanciful,'  who  was  banished  the  Town,  and  pro 
nounced  unworthy  of  Christian  society." 

If  Sharp  (says  the  Writer  of  the  A'.  13.  llei'icir)  was  "  a  born 
diplomatist;"  if  he  was  "full  of  dissimulation;"  if  it  was  "not 
in  his  nature  to  be  frank  and  outspoken,  but  rather  to  compass 
his  means  by  adroit  and  wary  policy,"  it  is  clear  that  he  was  not 
always  on  his  guard.  There  is  a  hearty  vehemence  in  his  resent 
ing  the  insult  of  flatly  being  called  "a  liar"  by  John  Sinclair, 
afterwards  Minister  of  Ormiston,  at  the  College  table,  while 
maintaining  the  principles  of  Hooker,  Hailes,  and  Hammond, 
with  giving  him  a  xharp  bo.r  on  tin:  ear ;  which  is  rather  to  be 
commended  than  otherwise,  and  even  raises  our  conception  of  his 
Grace.  This  was  the  act  not  of  a  circumventive  sneak,  but  the 
.sharp,  ready  impulse  of  S.  Peter  himself,  the  "Prince  of  Apostles." 
If  he  had  not,  upon  this  occasion,  boxed  Sinclair's  ears,  then  the 
various  foul  charges  of  Wodrow  and  Fraternity  might  have  had 
some  footing ;  but  if  he  did  what  he  is  said  to  have  done,  he  did 
well,  and  his  assailants'  condemnations  remain  unbolstered. 
Query :  Who  and  where  is  the  man  who  would  not  at  once  have 
en fed  him  soundly  who  had  used  towards  him  Sinclair's  noun} 
Undoubtedly  here  (if  at  all  allowable)  was  the  fit  place  and  time 
for  lynch  law. 

I  Print  here  entire  the  following  scarce  little  Book,  which  is 
quoted  or  referred  to  by  almost  every  Historian  who  has  anatom 
ized  the  Life  of  Sharp.  The  Copy  is  verbatim,  with  the  exception 
of  the  Side  Notes,  which  are  inserted  for  handiness  to  the 
Header. 


0  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDREWS. 

A  True  and  Impartial  Account  of  the  Life  of  the  most  Reverend 
Father  in  God,  DR.  JAMES  SHARP,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
Primate  of  all  Scotland,  and  Privy  Counsellor  to  his  most 
Sacred  Majesty,  J\in<j  Charles  II.  With  a  short  but  faithful 
Narrative  of  Ins  e.cecrable  Murder,  taken  from  J'ublick  Records, 
Original  Letters,  and  other  Manuscripts.  With  a  Preface, 
wherein  a  clear  J)iscuvery  is  made  of  the  malicious  falshoods 
contained  in  some  late  scandalous  Pools  and  Pamphlets  con- 
cerninij  that  a/air.  To  both  -which  is  subjoined  an  Appendix, 
containing  Copies  of  sucJi  Papers  as  are  therein  referred  to.— 
Psal.  v.  () :  "TJion  slitdt  destroy  them  that  speak  leasiiujs;  (lie 
Lord  will  abhor  the  bloody  and  deceitful  man."- -Printed  in 
the  year  M.DCC.XXIII. 

THE  PUBLISHED  TO  THE  READER. 

Tlu>  this  he  the  first  appearance  the  following  small  History  has  made 
in  the  world,  yet  it  received  not  only  the  first  draught,  but  its  perfect  linea 
ments,  several  years  ago  ;  when  the  Author  was  either  so  modest  as  to  be 
Documentary    diffident  of  his  own  performance,  or  that  he  really  then  wanted  two  or  three 
evidence.          ^  ^  matci-iai  Papers,  now  come  to  hand,  and  which  the  Header  will  find 
subjoined  to  the  Api>cn<U.r.    And  yet  without  any  stretch  it  may  be  said,  that 
the' Papers  wherewith  the  Author  himself  has  favoured  the  Publick,  are  suf 
ficient  by  themselves  to  denominate  the  following  Narrative  an  impartial 
and  well* vouched  Account  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  that  eminent  Prelate. 
For  here  the  Author  needs  not  bespeak  the  faith  afforded  to  Historians,  since 
what  is  advanced  by  him  with  respect  to  the  Primate's  extraction,  his  educa 
tion,  genius  in  his  younger  years,  &c.,  he  had  from  the  mouths  of  relations, 
and 'such  others  as  knew  him  and  his  Family  best,  which  is  all  can  be 
expected  in  such  a  case ;  and  what  is  here  set  down  in  reference  to  the  more 
active  part  of  his  life,  especially  from  the  year  1G59  to  his  decease,  is  suffi 
ciently  vouched  from  Original  Papers,  Publick  Records,  &c.,  chiefly  with 
respect  to  that  step  of  his  life  wherein  he  is  so  much  blamed  and  traduced 
by  the  Fanaticks  of   Scotland  to  this  day  (and  which,  indeed,  at  length 
cost  him  his   life).      The   impartial   Reader,  by  comparing  the  following 
short  Narrative,  and  the  Papers  thereto  relating  in  the  Awi'iulLr,  will  soon 
perceive  how  calumnious  and  unjust  these  men  are  to  his  memory ;  since 
thereby,  and  especially  by  the  Letter  from  General  Monk,  Xionb.  I.,  which 
our  Author  hath  also  favoured  us  with  in  his  A^cniliv,  'tis  more  than  evident 
how  faithfully  and  carefully  Mr.  Sharp  demeaned  himself  in  the  execution  of 
his  Commission  wherewith  he  was  intrusted ;  and  how,  after  an  impartial 


JAMES  SHARP.  7 

and  fair  report  of  his  diligence,  he  threw  up  his  said  Commission,  and  never 
had  another  from  that  party,  nor  was  so  much  as  entertaining  any  thought 
of  returning  to  Court,  till  called  by  his  Majesty,  in  summer,  1(500;  at  which 
time  he  had  indeed  a  notable  opportunity  of  being  satisfied  and  convinced 
not  only  of  the  expediency,  but  necessity  of  re-establishing  the  antient  and 
Apostolical  Government  in  this  Church,  by  a  frequent  conversation  with 
some  of  those  eminent  Divines  who  had  returned  with  his  Majesty.  But  in 
this  journey  to  Court,  it  is  not  so  much  as  alledged  by  his  adversaries  that 
he  had  any  Trust  or  Commission  from  the  Presbyterian  Ministers  here,  far 
less  in  his  succeeding  journey  thither,  towards  the  end  of  that  year. 

There  was,  indeed,  in  the  year  1080,  a  Paper  sent  up  to  London  by  the  Fanatical 
Scottish  Fanaticks,  and  Printed  by  their  brethren  there,  intitled  "A  True  ^TnJo 
Relation  of  what  is  discovered  concerning  the  Murder  of  the  Archbishop  of  Delation." 
St.  Andrews,  and  of  what  appears  to  have  been  the  occasion  thereof."  The 
design  of  which  Pamphlet  is  plainly  to  blacken  the  reputation  of  him  whose 
person  they  had  already  murdered,  and  as  far  as  possible  to  palliate  and 
excuse  that  execrable  fact.  But  altho  it  hath  been  long  since  discovered 
that  there  are  almost  as  many  falshoods  as  paragraphs  in  that  foolish  and 
malicious  Paper,  yet  here  our  Author  hath  favoured  us  in  his  Appoulic  with 
the  Copy  of  a  clear  Discovery  of  the  wicked  falshoods  therein  contained ; 
and  which  clear  Discovery  being  Printed  by  order  of  his  Majesty's  Privy 
Council,  is  well  worth  the  perusal  of  any  man  who,  without  prepossession, 
designs  to  be  informed  of  the  truth  of  that  fact.  Another  Narrative  whereof, 
also  Published  by  Authority,  our  Author  has  subjoined  in  his  Appendix, 
which  exactly  agrees  with  that  which  himself  gives,  from  the  Depositions  of 
Witnesses,  in  the  close  of  this  Tract. 

This,  then,  being  the  method  carefully  observed  by  our  Author  in  the 
following  Sheets,  and  which  is  so  commendable  in  itself,  approv'd  of  gener 
ally  in  the  world,  and  extremely  applauded  by  Mr.  Wodrow,  in  the  Preface 
to  his  First  Volume  of  "  The  History  of  the  Sufferings  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  and  which  himself  pretends  so  religiously  and  accurately  to  have 
observed ;  'tis  more  than  a  little  strange,  that  in  all  the  Passages  of  that 
Book  relating  to  the  Archbishop,  he  hath  visibly  and  shamelessly  transgressed 
his  own  rule,  as  will  appear  to  any  man  who  will  take  but  the  pains  to  look 
into  them ;  for  there  he  shall  find  the  most  impudent  railing  accusations,  Wodrow's 
heaviest  imputations,  and  most  wicked  aspersions  that  perhaps  were  ever  yet  ™ilins  accv 
seen  in  Print ;  and  all  this  without  so  much  as  once  offering  a  voucher  for 
most  part  of  the  facts  he  advances ;  and  the  few  vouchers  he  gives,  which 
regard  the  most  important  part  of  that  great  Prelate's  life,  viz.,  the  last 
scene  thereof,  are  foolish  and  incoherent  Narratives  of  the  Murder,  written 
by  the  vile  and  execrable  actors  themselves,  whose  interest  certainly  it  was, 
as  far  as  they  were  able,  to  defame  the  Primate,  especially  in  the  circum 
stances  of  his  behaviour  at  his  Death,  and  thereby  in  some  measure  excuse 
their  own  villany.  Whereas,  had  Mr.  Wodrow  had  that  ingenuity  he  so 


ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 


Witnesses'  nmcli  pretends  to,  lie  had  ready  at  hand  the  Depositions  of  the  Witnesses 
Depositions,  taken  not  only  before  the  Privy  Council,  but  at  CWpar,  St.  Andrews,  &c. ; 
not  only  of  the  Primate's  daughter  and  servants,  who  were  near  spectators 
of  that  bloody  tragedy,  but  of  the  tenants,  servants,  cottars,  &c.,  of  Magask, 
Stricldnnes,  Baldinny,  and  other  places,  who  may  well  be  supposed  to  be 
much  less  interested  than  either  the  Archbishop's  servants  or  the  wicked 
actors  themselves.  And  this  sure  cannot  but  be  far  more  inexcusable  in  Mr. 
Wodrow  than  any  other  man,  he  being  the  person  who  pretends  to  have 
diligently  searched  the  Sheriff  Court  Books  of  Fife,  for  Fines,  &c.;  and 
certainly  in  this  research  he  could  not  have  missed  the  Deposition  of  John 
Millar,  "Tenant  in  Magask,  touching  the  Murder,  as  also  that  of  Robert 
Black,  Tenant  in  Baldinny,  William  Dingwall  in  Caldhame,  father  to  one  of 
the  murderers,  and  many  others  which  stand  upon  record  in  these  Books. 

But  for  making  it  appear  that  this  is  no  false  accusation,  I  shall  once 
for  all  set  down  part  of  a  Paragraph  in  Mr.  Wodrow's  Preface  to  his  First 
Volume,  }>/i;i.  10,  where  these  are  his  words — "I  have  charged  the  Prelates 
with  being  the  first  movers  of  most  part  of  the  Persecutions  of  these  times  : 
this  is  a  matter  of  fact  fully  known  in  Scotland  [but  we  must  take  his  own 
bare  word  for  it] ;  and  I  could  not  have  written  impartially,  had  I  not  laid 
most  part  of  the  evils  of  this  period  at  their  door."  It  may  be  alledged,  that 
this  being  spoken  at  random  in  a  Preface,  the  Author  is  not  so  much  bound 
to  give  vouchers  for  what  he  there  says,  as  in  the  body  of  the  Book.  But 
then  it  should  be  considered,  that  when  he  comes  to  particulars  in  the  Book 
itself,  and  there  loads  the  Bishops  with  the  blame  of  all  what  he  calls  bar 
barous  and  cruel  in  that  period,  he  does  not  so  much  as  offer  one  proof  nor 
voucher  for  any  matter  of  fact  he  advances,  tho  certainly  matters  of  fact  of 
that  kind  ought  to  have  been  better  vouched  than  any  others. 

Thus,  also,  in  the  Introduction  to  that  Volume,  JHUJ.  5,  he  most  falsly 
and  maliciously  affirms,  "That  from  the  very  words  of  Mr.  Sharp's  Letter 
to  Mr.  Robert  Douglass,  from  London,  the  Reader  will  have  most  sensible 
proofs  of  Mr.  Sharp's  juggling,  prevarication,  and  betraying  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  and  his  treachery  to  the  worthy  Ministers  who  intrusted  him." 
Now  in  this  I  shall  so  far  agree  with  him,  as  willingly  to  appeal  to  his  Ma 
jesty's  Letter  to  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  in  August,  16GO  (inserted  in 
the  following  Narrative) ;  to  the  Letter  from  General  Monk  above  men 
tioned;  and  lastly,  to  the  nine  Letters  which  our  Author  has  here  inserted 
in  his  Appendix,  all  of  them  written  whilst  Mr.  Sharp  had  a  Commission 
from  them:  and  let  the  impartial  Reader  thence  judge  whether  Mr.  Sharp 
did  distinctly  and  honestly  inform  them  of  all  that  had  past  at  Court,  touch- 
,ing  the  subject  of  his  Commission;  and  as  fairly  forwarn  them  of  what  he 
saw  was  inevitably  coming,  and  whether  he  neglected  one  jot  of  his  instruc 
tions.  These  nine  Letters  here  inserted,  I  can  assure  the  Reader,  are  all 
taken  from  Copies  of  them  written  with  his  own  hand,  which  he  kept,  as  he 
did  Copies  of  every  thing  of  importance  that  he  dispatched.  But  whether  or 


Letters 
garbled  by 
"Wodrow. 


JAMES  SHAEP.  9 

not  Mr.  Wodrow's  Copies  be  genuine,  is  more  than  I  can  tell,  not  having 
leisure  to  compare  them ;  only,  upon  a  very  cursory  view,  I  find  that  Mr. 
Wodrow,  in  the  Abbreviate  he  gives  us  of  Mr.  Sharp's  Letter  to  Mr.  Robert 
Douglas,  Dated  the  29th  of  May,  1600,  hath,  if  not  wilfully  perverted,  yet 
grossly  mistaken  the  meaning  of  the  Writer,  as  may  be  evident  to  any  man 
who  will  take  the  pains  to  compare  the  Letter  itself,  set  down  by  our  Author 
in  his  Appendix,  with  the  said  Abbreviate  in  Mr.  Wodrow's  Introduction, 
pay.  26.  Further,  in  Mr.  Sharp's  Letter  to  Mr.  Douglas,  Dated  the  1  of 
June  that  year,  you'll  find,  near  the  beginning,  these  words,  "When  I  spoke 
of  his  (i.e.,  the  King's)  calling  a  General  Assembly;"  but  Mr.  Wodrow  thinks 
fit  to  leave  out  the  word  his,  the  reason  whereof,  I  hope,  needs  not  be  told. 
Nor  need  I  tell  any  intelligent  Reader  why  in  the  same  Letter,  after  these 
words,  "His  Majesty  speaking  of  us  and  our  concernments  most  affection 
ately,"  Mr.  Wodrow  omits  what  immediately  follows,  viz.,  "  And  that  I 
needed  not  to  inform  him  of  the  usage  we  have  had  from  the  Remonstrators;" 
nay,  leaves  out  the  most  material  and  remarkable  passages  in  the  close. 
Besides  these,  he  has  not  thought  fit  to  insert  Mr.  Sharp's  Letter  immedi 
ately  next  to  that  of  the  14th  of  June,  but  without  Date,  because  therein 
Gilespie,  the  professed  enemy  to  the  Royal  Family,  is  exposed.  As  also 
that  Letter  immediately  following  another  of  the  7th  of  July,  without  Date 
also,  which  exposes  to  purpose  the  Remonstrators,  and  gives  a -testimony 
beyond  all  exception  of  Mr.  Sharp's  integrity.  A  further  evidence  whereof 
we  have  in  his  Letter  of  the  14th  of  July,  which  is  also  most  unfairly  sup 
pressed  by  Mr.  Wodrow ;  together  with  a  long  and  remarkable  Passage  of 
another  Letter  of  his,  Dated  the  26  of  July,  also  touching  the  Remonstrators. 
What  other  false  Abbreviates,  Interpolations,  &c.,  Mr.  Wodrow  has  used  in 
this  matter,  I  had  no  leisure  to  examine  :  but  ex  unyue  Jeoneni. 

But  before  we  speak  of  the  Primate's  Murder,  I  shall  briefly  notice 
another  Passage  in  Mr.  Wodrow's  First  Volume,  pay.  101,  where  he  gives  an  "worthy 
Abbreviate  of  his  Life  and  Death,  wrote,  as  he  says,  by  a  sufferer,  a  Avorthy 
gentleman.  This  Narrative  I  have  not  seen,  unless  it  be  that  which  is  now  tions 
in  Print,  and  Published  in  the  year  1719,  by  an  anonymous  Author.  If  this 
be  Mr.  Wodrow's  worthy  gentleman  (as  probably  he  is),  it  must  be  owned 
that  he  himself  is  a  very  worthy  gentleman  who  gives  so  large  a  character  of 
a  person  in  whose  Work  there  is  nothing  to  be  found  but  a  mixture  of 
beastly  ignorance,  with  deep  malice  and  deliberate  revenge;  and  who,  beside 
that  he  does  not  so  much  as  offer  any  voucher  at  all  for  what  he  says  (tho 
he  advances  facts  never  before  heard  of),  impudently  averrs  things  that  are 
plainly  redargued  by  Publick  Records  and  other  authentick  Documents. 
Witness  his  saying,  pay.  51,  that  the  Archbishop's  brother  was  made  Lord 
Justice  Clerk;  and  paye  53,  his  making  the  great  Mr.  Robert  Blair  to  die 
cursing,  which,  in  charity  to  the  Dead,  we  must  look  upon  as  a  falshood ; 
his  making  one  of  the  three  Estates  of  the  Scots  Parliament  to  consist  of 
Lords  Spiritual  and  Temporal,  page  138.  But,  which  is  still  more  diverting, 

VOL.  II.  B 


WS 


10  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

although  the  Treatise  he  but  very  small,  yet  an  ingenuous  gentleman  of  my 
acquaintance  lias  taken  the  pains  to  collect  upwards  of  BO  places  wherein 
the  Author  plainly  contradicts  himself.     This  Book  being  an  Account  of  the 
Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  James  Sharp,  is  nevertheless  Dedicated  to  himself; 
and  the  Author  fairly  tells  him,  "  That  many  of  his  actions  may  yet  live  to 
his  perpetual  infamy,  except  the  black  lines  of  his  life  be  blotted  out  by  tears 
of  unfeigned  repentance."     But  this  is  said  forty  years  after  his  Death. 
Sharp  "  taking          Mr?  AYodrow  proceeds,  and  tells  us,  "  That  Mr.  Sharp  took  the  tender ;" 
he  Tender."     ^^  ^hidi,  nothing  was  ever  more  false  or  calumnious  ;  nor  had  ever  Mr. 
Sharp,  or  any  other  Minister,  the  least  temptation  to  that  wickedness."    He 
tells  us  next, u  That  Cromwell  publickly  declared  Mr.  Sharp  to  be  an  atheist." 
A  noble  voucher,  had  it  been  true  !     And  without  hyperbole  it  may  be  said, 
that  it  was  scarce  possible  for  Mr.  AYudrow  (tho  no  thanks  to  him  for  it)  to 
have  impressed  a  better  character  on  the  minds  of  all  honest  men,  of  Mr. 
Sharp,  than  by  telling  Cromwell's  opinion,  that  he  was  an  atheist ;  which 
was  just  as  much  as  to  say,  he  was  a  Royalist ;  for  thus  were  the  King's 
friends  in  those  days  clothed  in  wild  beasts'  skins,  in  order  to  be  worried  to 
Death.     And  that  Doctor  Sharp  was  an  atheist  in  this  sense,  appears  pretty 
well  from  this  known  Passage.     In  November,  1G50,  Avhcn  General  Monk 
had  arrived  at  Caldstream,  and  fully  understood  the  enemies'  posture,  he 
presently  dispatched  an  express  to  Crail,  where  Mr.  Sharp  then  was  attend 
ing  his  Charge,  intrcating  that  with  all  speed  he  would  repair  to  him,  because 
he"  had  something  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  impart.     Hereupon  Mr. 
Sharp  takes  journey  in  very  tempestuous  weather ;  and  immediately  upon 
his  arrival  at  Caldstream,  the  General,  in  a  secret  Conference,  frankly  sig 
nified  to  him  his  earnest  desire  to  restore  the  King,  which  he  said  he  well 
knew  Mr.  Sharp  was  passionately  inclined  for;  but  that  he  wras  so  embarassed 
how  to  bring  that  great  work  about,  that  he  knew  not  what  step  first  to  take, 
and  therefore  had  called  him  to  know  what  he  thought  fit  to  advise  in  the 
matter :  that  many  of  his  Army,  beginning  to  suspect  his  intentions,  had 
already  deserted ;  and  lastly,  that  Lambert,  on  the  head  of  the  English 
Republican  Army,  which  was  double  his  numbers,  had  fallen  down  as  far  as 
Newcastle.    Mr.  Sharp  coldly  told  him,  that  he  was  extremely  fatigued  with 
his  journey,  and  therefore,  in  the  first  place,  desired  a  little  rest ;  and  then 
after  two  'hours'  sleep,  he  sat  down  and  penned  a  Declaration  in  Monk's 
name,  shewing  the  causes  of  his  present  posture,  and  designed  March  into 
England;  which,  without  mentioning  the  King,  was  so  exactly  accommodated 
Monk  and  his   to  ^1C  tempers  of  all  the  then  contending  parties,  that  it  having  been  read 
Ar°my.an'      '    next  morning  on  the  head  of  Monk's  Army,  it  soon  confirmed  them  in  their 
duty  to  their°General ;  and  being  quickly  dispersed  over  all  the  Country,  it 
arrived  at  length  at  Lambert's  Head  Quarters  :  the  effect  whereof  was,  that 


-••  The  Tender  was  an  Oath  or  Instrument  by  which  the  party  signing  abjured  or 
renounced  allegiance  to  King  Charles  II. 


JAMES  SHAKP.  11 

at  least  one  half  of  his  men  deserted  over  to  Monk,  who  thereupon  was 
encouraged  to  proceed  in  his  design,  and  to  march  straight  towards  London; 
and  what  followed  thereupon,  is  too  well  known  to  he  here  set  down.  I  am 
credibly  informed,  that  a  Copy  of  this  Declaration  will  within  a  little  time 
be  Published  in  a  greater  Work,  and  therefore  thought  it  not  proper  to  insert 
it  here.  But  this  I  know,  that  the  above-mentioned  notable  Passage  was 
often  and  openly  owned  by  Monk  to  his  Majesty  and  many  others,  after  the 
Restoration ;  and  I  have  the  truth  of  it  attested  by  many  persons  of  honour 
and  respect  (some  of  them  in  Letters  under  their  hands),  who  best  knew  Mr. 
Sharp's  affairs  :  to  which  they  add,  that  this  was  the  true  cause  of  the  great, 
man's  after  promotion.  And  if  so  vigorous  and  effectual  an  effort  to  restore 
the  Royal  Family  can  denominate  Mr.  Sharp  an  atheist  or  a  betrayer  of  the 
Church,  we  may  safely  conclude  that,  were  he  alive,  he  would  not  be  ashamed 
of  the  charge. 

As  to  that  foolish  and  malicious  fable  which  Mr.  Wodrow  next  takes  isabel  Lindsay 
notice  of,  from  his  worthy  friend's  narrative,  touching  one  Isabel  Lindsay,  ^cllllda 
who,  he  says,  accused  the  Bishop  publickly,  not  only  of  uiicleanncss  with 
her  self,  but  murdering  the  child :  there  arc  persons  even  at  this  distance  of 
time  yet  alive  at  St.  Andrews  and  elsewhere,  who  can  attest  that  there  was 
never  any  such  thing  objected  to  him  by  that  woman,  not  one  word  spoken 
by  her  (thu  if  it  had,  yet  could  it  have  no  impression  upon  any  sober  person) 
touching  the  murder  of  a  child,  &c.  But  for  this,  I  need  no  more  but  to 
refer  the  Reader  to  the  Narrative  itself,  as  set  down  by  Mr.  Wodrow's  worthy 
gentleman  ;  and  then  let  the  Avoiid  judge  in  what  condition  that  woman  was 
when  this  happened.  The  truth  is,  she  was  for  many  years  lookt  upon  by 
all  who  knew  her  to  be  a  fanciful  and  melancholy  person  ;  and  yet  when 
examined  touching  that  abuse  in  the  Church,  she  still  refused  either  to  speak 
or  hear  an  ill  word  of  the  Archbishop.  The  whole  of  which  passage  I  have 
from  a  gentleman  of  honour  there,  who  has  taken  the  pains  to  enquire  about 
it  at  such  persons  in  that  place  as  are  still  alive,  and  were  eye  and  car  wit 
nesses  to  what  then  passed ;  and  therefore  I  have  inserted  in  the  Aji^cmlu- 
(Xiiitih.  I.)  part  of  his  Letter  touching  that  affair. 

But  further,  with  respect  to  that  foolish  calumny,  I  shall  ask  Mr. 
Wodrow  and  his  worthy  friend  these  two  plain  questions — 1.  Whether  they 
can  produce  any  vouchers  for  this  strange  piece  of  History  ?  If  they  can, 
why  does  not  Mr.  Wodrow  insert  them,  as  he  pretends  to  do  for  every  fact 
he  advances,  and  really  has  done  for  trifles  ?  If  they  have  none,  why  does 
he  insert  the  story  for  a  truth,  so  contrary  to  his  own  profession  in  his  Pre 
face  and  many  other  places  of  the  Work  ?  2.  This  piece  of  History  was 
either  known  before  Mr.  Sharp's  promotion,  or  not :  if  it  was,  why  was  it 
not  publickly  prosecuted  (a  thing  then  very  easy  against  a  private  Minister), 
and  he  brought  to  condign  punishment  ?  The  only  answer  I  can  forsee  to 
this  is,  that  Mr.  Sharp  was  then  esteemed  one  of  the  Godly ;  and  as  God 
sees  no  fault  in  such,  so  it  was  hoped  he  would  do  Him  as  much  service 


12 


ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  HI.  ANDREWS. 


Scandal  about 
the  Abp.'s 
sister-in-law. 


James  Mit 
chell's  trans 
action. 


another  way  as  would  compense  that  peccadillo,  which,  i  am  told,  was  their 
way  of  speaking  in  those  times.  If  it  was  not  known  before  his  promotion, 
how  came  such  a  dreadful  story,  that  had  lyen  so  long  dormant,  then  to 
break  out  ?  May  we  not  here  be  tempted,  without  impinging  on  charity,  to 
say,  that  the  whole  was  a  wicked  forgery,  designed  to  expose  (if  not  to  sober 
and  thinking  men,  yet  to  silly  women,  whom  they  use  to  lead  captive)  the 
reputation  of  this  great  and  good  man. 

Reading  over  the  Preface  of  Mr.  Wodrow's  friend's  Book,  I  find  another 
malicious  calumny,  which  was  never  yet  advanced  by  any  other,  no,  not  by 
Mr.  WodroAV  himself,  viz.,  touching  the  Archbishop's  sister-in-law,  her  being 
got  with  child  by  himself,  and  sent  to  the  North  to  bring  it  forth,  Ac.  But 
that  the  wickedness  of  that  Satanical  story  may  appear,  I  have  inserted  in 
the  Appcudir  (Xinnb.  II. )  a  Passage  of  a  Letter  touching  that  affair,  which  I 
received  from  a  person  of  known  honour  and  veracity,  who  had  the  best 
opportunity  of  any  other  to  know  the  whole  affairs  of  that  family. 

Another  thing  wherewith  the  Primate  is  charged  by  Mr.  Wodrow  in  the 
aforecited  place,  is  no  less  than  the  horrid  crime  of  Perjury,  whereof  he 
accuses  him  as  guilty  in  the  case  of  Mr.  James  Mitchell,  but  without  so  much 
as  giving  the  least  ground  or  reason  for  what  he  so  impudently  and  calumni- 
ously  advanceth;  which  alone,  'tis  hoped,  Avill  appear  to  any  Christian  a  suf 
ficient  answer,  tlio  no  more  should  be  said  upon  the  head ;  since  every  man 
upon  Oath  is  presumed  to  have  declared  the  truth  till  the  contrary  be  made 
appear,  which  in  the  present  case  is  not  so  much  as  offered  to  be  done.    But 
further,  I  shall  here  acquaint  the  Reader,  that  in  a  cursory  Preface  to  so 
small  a  Treatise  (which  gives  us  only  the  Life  of  a  single  man),  I  do  not 
judge  myself  bound,  nor  is  it  pertinent  in  this  place,  to  digress  into  a  vindi 
cation  of  the  procedure  of  our  High  Courts  of  Judicature  in  that  affair ;  tho 
I  am  certainly  informed,  that  even  that  same  will  very  shortly  be  performed 
by  an  abler  pen.     All  therefore  that  can  be  here  expected,  is  a  vindication 
of  the  Lord  Primat  (so  far  as  a  negative  can  go)  from  the  horrid  imputation 
of  Perjury.     And  as  to  this,  I  hope  it  will,  to  an  impartial  Reader,  appeal- 
sufficient  to  set  down  the  words  of  his  Lordship's  Oath,  as  copied  by  Mr. 
Wodrow  himself ;  for  his  Grace  being  there  adduced  simply  as  a  Witness  for 
proving  the  Assassination,  plainly  declares,  "  That  he  had  a  wave  (i.e.,  a 
transient  glance)  of  Mitchell  passing  from  the  coach  and  crossing  the  street, 
which  had  such  an  impression  on  him,  that  the  first  sight  he  saw  of  him, 
after  he  was  taken,  he  knew  him  to  be  the  person  who  shot  the  shot."     The 
truth  of  this  part  of  the  Oath,  'tis  hoped,  will  find  credit  with  any  man  who 
hath  perused  the  Narrative  of  that  Assassination,  as  related  by  Mr.  Wodrow 
himself,  with  the  Depositions  of  the  Chirurgeons  and  other  Witnesses,  copied 
from  the  Books  of  Adjournal,  by  the  Collector  of  the  State  Trials,  vol.  2, 
pay.  69,  et  scqq.     As  to  the  following  part  of  the  Archbishop's  Oath,  he  there 
deposeth  no  more  than  what  was  plainly  Sworn  by  several  other  Privy 
Counsellors  of  known  honour  and  integrity,  viz.,  "  That  he  heard  Mitchell 


JAMES  SHARP.  IB 

own  to  the  Privy  Council  his  Confession  made  to  the  Committee  [of  which 
Committee,  by  the  by,  his  Grace  was  no  member],  and  that  he  heard  him  at 
the  Bar  renew  the  same  ;  and  that  there  was  no  assurance  of  life  then  or 
there  given  him,  or  so  much  as  desired  by  him."  This  part  of  the  Oath  the 
Primate's  adversaries  do  not  at  all  controvert ;  and  tho  it  were  granted  (as 
is  indeed  set  down  in  the  Narrative  of  an  Act  of  Privy  Council  yet  extant) 
that  the  Committee,  or  one  of  their  number,  had  promised  Mitchell  his  life 
upon  his  Confession;  yet  that  promise,  if  any  there  was,  being  made  in 
secret,  as  is  acknowledged  by  all  parties,  it  could  not  consist  with  the  Pri 
mate's  knowledge,  nor  was  he  interrogated  thereupon,  but  only  on  what  had 
past  in  the  Privy  Council.  And  as  to  the  latter  part  of  the  Oath,  touching 
private  promises  allcdged  to  have  been  made  by  the  Archbishop  himself,  his 
Deposition  is  very  clear  and  distinct  ;  and  if  Mitchell  or  any  of  his  friends 
have  asserted  that  he  had  any  such  promise  from  his  Grace,  let  the  world  be 
judge  whether  more  credit  ought  to  be  given  to  a  man  upon  Oath  than  to 
the  malicious  assertion  of  a  vile  monster  of  nature  and  common  enemy  to 
all  humane  society,  who  (as  is  evident  from  his  last  speech)  went  to  the 
grave  with  a  lye  in  his  right  hand. 

But  that  the  Reader  may  a  little  further  perceive  Mr.  Wodrow's  great  WochWs 
proficiency  in  the  art  of  speaking  evil  of  dignities,  and  reviling  his  betters,  I  propensity  to 
shall  here  give  a  hint  at  the  charitable  characters  he  gives  of  such  Bishops  dignities." 
as  were  first  replanted  in  Scotland  after  his  Majesty's  Restoration;  and  shall 
leave  these  characters  to  be  compared  with  the  Account  given  of  the  same 
men  by  the  late  Bishop  of  Sarum,  cited  by  our  Author  in  this  Treatise  ; 
premising  only  this,  that  'tis  hoped  no  true  Presbyterian  will  doubt  of  Doctor 
Burnet's  veracity  in  the  matter,  especially  since  he  professes  that  he  had  not 
his  knowledge  of  them  by  hear-say,  but  knew  the  persons  he  describes.  But 
far  less  will  Mr.  Wodrow  call  in  question  the  truth  of  what  is  there  advanced 
by  that  great  Prelate,  considering  the  noble  character  himself  gives  of  him, 
col.  1,  paij.  334,  where  he  says,  "  That  he  was  a  person  well  known  to  the 
world;  and  after  being  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Glasgow,  persecuted  for  his 
appearing  against  Popery,  and  for  the  cause  of  Liberty ;  and  since  the  Re 
volution,  the  learned  and  moderate  Bishop  of  Sarum,  one  of  the  great  eye 
sores  of  the  High-fivers  and  Torries  of  England,  and  a  very  great  ornament 
to  his  native  Country.'' 

His  character,  then,  of  Bishop  Sharp  I  shall  scarce  need  to  rehearse,  His  character 
the  whole  First  Volume  of  his  Work,  and  the  beginning  of  the  Second,  being 
stuffed  with  wicked  nonsense  and  virulent  lying  invectives  against  him ;  only 
in  paye  101  (where  he  liberally  bestows  his  compliments  of  this  kind  upon 
them  all)  he  says,  among  other  things,  that  Mr.  Sharp's  great  talent  was 
dissimulation,  and  that  he  got  himself  into  the  Archbishoprick  of  St.  Andrews 
as  a  reward  for  betraying  the  Church.  That  Mr.  Fairfowll,  Archbishop  of 
Glasgow,  was  a  man  who  wras  never  taken  to  be  either  serious  or  sincere ; 
talks  of  his  intrigues  with  a  lady  in  Berwickshire,  &c.  That  Mr.  Sydserf, 


14  AKCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Bishop  of  Orkney,  was  Deposed  in  the  year  1G38,  for  the  common  faults  of 
the  Prelates  of  that  time,  and  in  particular  for  erroneous  Doctrine.     Of  Mr. 
Mitchell,  Bishop  of  Aberdeen,  he  only  says,  that  he  was  Deposed  by  the 
General  Assembly  for  Heresy.     That  Mr.  Hamilton,  Bishop  of  Galloway, 
was  remarkable  for  his  cunning  time-serving  temper.     But  above  all,  his 
character  of  Doctor  Wishart,  Bishop  of  Edinburgh  (who,  besides  his  vast 
learning,  was  deservedly  owned  by  all  sides  to  have  been  a  true  pattern  of 
piety,  charity,  and  other  Christian  vcrtues),  gives  us  a  very  just  estimate  of 
Presbyterian  gratitude.    This  learned  and  pious  gentleman  had  been  Gover- 
nour  to  the  great  Montrosc— the  only  crime  the  zealous  mad  men  of  those 
days  could  charge  him  with, — and  had  with  astonishing  patience  endured 
the  very  utmost  of  phanatical  cruelty  and  revenge,  being  thrust  into  a  nasty 
prison  in  Edinburgh,  where  he  continued  till  the  rats  and  other  vermine  had 
almost  devoured  him,  whereof  he  bore  the  marks  on  his  face  to  the  grave. 
Rebellion  at      Yet,  when  after  the  horrid  Rebellion  at  Pcntlandhills,  a  great  company  of 
Pentlandhills.  j-}ic  most  active  traitors  were  committed  to  the  same  very  prison,  he,  being 
then  Bishop  of  Edinburgh,  supplied  all  of  them  out  of  his  own  pocket  with 
every  thing  necessary  for  life  during  their  abode  there,  and  kindly  visited 
them,  as  was  ingenuously  confessed  and  attested  by  some  of  them  alive  not 
many  years  ago,  and  by  some  others  yet  alive,  from  whom  I  had  the  account, 
and  who  were  eye-witnesses  thereto.     The  return  of  which  kindness  by  Mr. 
"\Vodrow  is  a  most  wicked  invective  and  false  aspersion,  wherein  no  body 
else,  whether  Whig  or  Tory,  agrees  with  him,  viz.,  that  he  could  not  refrain 
from  prophane  swearing,  even  upon  the  Street  of  Edinburgh ;  and  that  he 
was  a  known  drunkard.      This  brave  Historian  adds,  that  his  lascivious 
Poems,  compared  with  the  most  luscious  parts  of  Ovid  ( ]>e  Arte  Annnuli), 
are  modest ;  wherein,  besides  other  things,  he  wilfully  mistakes  the  person, 
it  being  well  known  to  all  the  Nation  that  it  was  another  Wishart  was  the 
Author  of  that  Poem  he  seems  to  mean;  and  who,  by  the  by,  tlio  afterwards 
a  Minister,  was  not  above  20  years  of  age  when  it  was  composed,  and  not  at 
all  then  designing  for  the  Ministry.    Yet  all  this,  and  much  worse,  the  world 
must  take  upon  the  bare  word  of  this  foolish  and  virulent  accuser  of  the 
Brethren,  who,  it  seems,  has  nothing  less  in  his  view  than  Truth  when  he 
writes  concerning  a  Bishop,  as  will  yet  further  appear  when  we  proceed  to 
consider  the  Account  he  gives  of  the  Primate's  execrable  Murder. 

Mr.  Wodrow,  in  his  Second  Volume,  thinks  fit  to  bestow  a  whole  Section 
on  this  direful  action,  pay.  28  ct  st'<j<j.,  and  in  the  entry  thereto  industriously 
declines  calling  it  a  Murder  (as  all  true  Presbyterians  do),  but  names  it  only 
a  violent  Death,  a  violent  tnkimj  airay,  &c.  He  says  it  is  not  a  little  misrepre 
sented  by  the  Tory  Writers.  This  is  a  wilful  mistake,  since  lie  knows  that 
all  the  Accounts  of  it  hitherto  Published  by  those  he  calls  Tories  are  fairly 
copied  from  that  which  was  Published  by  Authority,  and  taken  from  the 
Depositions  of  Witnesses,  inserted  in  the  Privy  Council  Records;  as  appears, 
among  others,  from  the  Account  given  of  it  by  our  Author.  Mr.  Wodrow 


JAMES  SHAEP.  15 

adds,  that  he  has  no  design  to  vindicate  the  action,  actors,  or  circumstances 
of  it,  which  he  owns  he  does  not  approve;  and  that  he,  as  much  as  any,  does 
heartily  abhor  all  Assassinations,  with  the  principles  which  lead  thereunto. 
And  this  leads  me  to  a  very  obvious  remark.  The  Jesuites'  method,  in  cases 
of  this  kind,  is  pretty  well  known.  I  shall  only  instance  that  unparalleled 
wickedness  of  the  Gunpowder  Treason.  They  of  that  Society,  perceiving 
that  the  fact  cannot  be  denied,  all  the  actors  having  gone  to  Death  confess-  i>k>tP° 
ing,  or  rather  avowing  the  design ;  and  finding,  on  the  other  hand,  that  so 
execrable  an  intention  could  nowise  be  defended,  they  freely  yield  the  argu 
ment,  and  are  as  ready  to  condemn  that  wicked  project  as  any  Protestant 
whatsoever.  But  then  you  shall  find  them  tell  you,  that  those  Conspirators 
were  Banditi,  Enthusiasts,  &c.,  whom  they  disown  to  be  of  their  Communion, 
and  therefore  that  'tis  most  unjust  to  load  the  Roman  Catholicks  with  such 
actions  or  principles  that  lead  thereto.  And  this  is  the  sum  of  what  Pere 
D' Orleans  and  other  Popish  Writers  say,  by  way  of  apology  for  their  party 
in  this  matter ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time  you  shall  find  the  very  names  of 
these  vile  parricides  have  a  place  in  the  Roman  Martyrology,  nay  one  of 
them,  Garnet  the  Jesuite,  Canonized  on  that  same  account.  And  I  mind 
long  since  to  have  read  in  Mandelslo's  Travels  to  the  East  Indies,  that  he 
saw  in  a  Religious  House,  belonging  to  the  Jesuites  there,  the  pictures  of  all 
the  Gunpowder  Conspirators  placed  in  a  G  allery  among  the  pictures  of  such 
as,  since  the  institution  of  their  Order,  had  suffered  Martyrdom  in  propagat 
ing  the  Gospel.  Now  this  I  say  is  precisely  the  present  case.  Most  of  the 
Scots  Puritans  whom  I  have  had  occasion  to  converse  with  do,  as  Mr.  Wodrow 
does  in  several  places  of  the  above-cited  Section,  loudly  condemn  this  fact  of 
the  Primate's  Murder,  and  declare  it  unwarrantable,  and  therefore  still  cry  Primate's 
out,  that  it  is  great  injustice  to  charge  the  Presbyterians  (as  some  malicious  Murder- 
Tories  do)  with  the  fact,  telling  us  wit  hall,  that  the  actors  were  Separatists 
from  them,  followers  of  C argil,  Cameron,  &c.,  who  had  preached  separation 
from  the  rest.  And  yet  with  the  same  breath,  throughout  all  the  said  Sec 
tion,  we  find  Mr.  Wodrow  using  so  many  arguments  in  the  defence  of  it,  and 
shuffling  in  such  extenuating  circumstances  (all  of  them,  by  the  by,  false  in 
fact),  to  palliate  and  excuse  the  wickedness,  that  one  would  be  almost  tempted 
to  believe,  that  if  he  was  not  one  of  the  Conspirators  himself,  he  does  at  least 
approve  of  the  deed,  by  his  intitling  it  to  the  Providence  of  God,  &c.  Nay, 
speaking  of  their  open  Rebellion  the  following  year  at  Airdsmoss,  he  thus 
concludes,  "We  want  not  other  instances  of  pious  persons  essaying  imprac 
ticable  [he  does  not  say  villanous  and  rebellious]  things,  and  perishing  in  the 
attempt,  which  flowed  from' zeal,  and  was  mixed  with  self-resignation  [mark 
the  hypocrite] ;  and  they  have  rather  been  esteemed  heroick  than  mad  and 
irregular."  But  beside  his  defending  of  that  fact,  which  within  a  paragraph 
or  two  before  he  had  disclaimed,  all  they  that  suffered  011  that  account — such 
as  Halkerston  of  Rathillet,  Guilan,  and  some  others,  who,  having  been  found 
afterwards  privy  to  the  Plot,  refused  at  their  Trial  to  own  the  Archbishop's 


10  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

slaughter  to  have  been  a  Murder,  disowned  the  King's  Authority,  &c. — are, 
not  only  by  the  Author  of  the  "Hind  let  Loose,"  but  by  Mr.  Wodrow, 
reckoned  among  the  Church  of  Scotland's  Martyrs,  and  recorded  as  such  in 
his  Book.  Now,  whether  our  Scots  Jesuites  have  borrowed  this  method  from 
or  lent  it  to  their  Roman  Brethren,  I  shall  not  determine,  but  surely  the 
practice  has  been  all  along  very  familiar  to  both. 

In  the  second  Paragraph  of  the  above-cited  Section,  Mr.  "\Vodrow,  after 
having  given  the  Archbishop  the  charitable  epithet  of  "a  bloody  and  perfidi 
ous  man,"  has  the  assurance  to  say,  "  That  he  came  to  this  fatal  exit  by  no 
premeditated  and  formed  design ;  but  circumstances  offering  an  occasion,  it 
was  very  suddenly  given  into."  And  a  little  thereafter,  '•  That  he  is  well 
assured  the  people  concerned  had  not  the  least  view  of  this,  or  any  design 
this  way,  till  the  accounts  of  his  being  near  them  were  brought  to  them." 
This  he  pursues  in  the  following  Paragraphs,  and  tells  us  the  old  out-dated 
story,  which  none  of  the  party  themselves  ever  did  or  do  believe,  "  That  the 
design  was  only  against  Baillie  Carmichael,  whom  having  missed,  they  were 
just  talking  together  of  parting,  and  quitting  the  project,  when  they  were 
informed  that  the  Archbishop's  coach  was  at  hand."  This  presently  he 
attributes  to  Providence,  as  if  God  so  far  approved  of  the  action  "  That  He 
was  now  pointing  out  the  man  to  them  [these  are  his  words]  whom  He 
(^csionc^  they  should  destroy,  and  whom  He  had,  it  seems,  delivered  into 
their  hands."  The  design  of  this  foolish  and  fabulous  story  (since  for  the 
truth  of  it  we  must  intirely  depend  upon  the  assertions  of  the  murderers 
themselves,  who  are  Mr.  Wodrow's  only  vouchers)  is  to  extenuate  the  guilt, 
as  if  the  wickedness  had  not  only  been  nowise  premeditated,  but  that  the 
Lord  had  directed  them  to  it.  For  it  is  no  strange  thing  for  that  faction  to 
make  God  the  author  of  their  foulest  actings,  and  when  they  have  no  argu 
ments  a  priori',  to  bring  this  piece  of  Turkish  Divinity  as  an  argument  a 
jiostci-iore,  viz.,  the  success  of  the  action  to  justify  their  villanies.  But  to 
expose  this  Jesuitical  fiction,  it  were  sufficient,  at  least  for  the  conviction  of 
any  sober  unprejudiced  person,  barely  to  set  down  two  Informations  sent 
over  to  the  Privy  Council  from  St.  Andrews,  taken  out  of  the  Depositions  of 
John  Millar,  Tenant  in  Magask,  and  those  of  his  family;  Robert  Black, 
Tenant  in  Baldinny,  his  wife,  children,  servants,  cottars,  &c. ;  William  Ding- 
wall  in  Caldhame,  father  to  one  of  the  murderers;  and  several  other  persons 
whose  Depositions  were  taken  at  Cowpar  by  the  Sheriff-Depute.  The  Infor 
mations  which  are  lying  before  me  are  too  prolix  to  be  here  inserted,  but  the 
substance  of  the  first  of  them  is,  "  That  by  the  Letters  found  about  young 

F y,  and  other  Letters  found  in  the  chest  of  Russel  in  the  Kettle,  one  of 

the  prime  actors  (which  Letters  are  there  declared  to  be  in  the  custody  of 
Captain  Carnegy  of  Finhaven,  or  the  Sheriff-Depute),  it  is  more  than  evident 
that  the  deed  had  been  long  premeditated  by  the  actors,  and  many  moe  ; 
that  his  Grace  was  waylaid  by  diverse  parties  (as  the  Witnesses  depone),  so 
that  whether  he  had  gone  straight  to  St.  Andrews,  or  repaired  to  his  house 


JAMES  SHAEP.  17 

of  Scotscraig,  lie  could  not  escape  them."  It  was  also  deponed,  "  That  the 
nine  who  committed  the  Murder  were  the  night  hefore  at  a  country  place, 
within  a  mile  of  Craighall,  called  Hurleswind ;  and  that  one  of  them,  with 
Andrew  Turnbull,  Tenant  to  Broomhall  (who  had  crossed  the  water  the 
same  tide  with  his  Grace),  came  to  Kennoway  about  midnight,  and  enquired 
if  my  Lord  St.  Andrews  was  lodged  at  Captain  Seton's  ;  and  being  told  that 
lie  was,  he  presently  returned  to  the  rest.  That  on  the  morning  of  the  3d 
of  May  they  were  seen  on  Tace's  Muir,  and  intended  to  have  attacked  the 
coach  on  the  Heath  to  the  South  of  Ceres,  where  it  seems  they  were  in 
some  confusion;  for  Fiathillet's  horse  ran  from  him,  and  was  taken  and  given 
back  to  him  by  the  gardincr  of  Struthers;  and  John  Balfour,  with  one  more, 
entred  so  far  into  the  Town  of  Ceres,  in  pursuit  of  the  coach,  that  by  mistake 
he  rode  to  the  Minister's  gate,  and  quickly  retired.  Thereafter  (as  is  also 
deponed),  having  still  the  coach  in  view  (so  grossly  false  is  Mr.  Wodrow's 
Account),  they  kept  half  a  mile  to  the  South  thereof,  till  they  came  to  Kin- 
ninmonth,  the  coach  then  being  about  Blebo-hole  ;  and  then  they  quickly 
came  down  from  the  height,  and  galloped  through  a  little  valley  at  Ladeddie 
Limekilns,  having  the  top  of  the  coach  still  in  view,  with  design  to  have 
committed  the  Murder  at  the  Double  Dykes  of  Magask."  And  thus  the 
Depositions  proceed  to  the  Murder  itself,  &c. 

In  the  other  Information  which  was  sent  over  to  the  Privy  Council  a  The  Murder 
few  days  thereafter,  we  are  told  from  other  Depositions,  "That  three  days 
before  the  Murder,  viz.,  the  1st  of  May,  some  of  the  assassines  had  a  meeting 
at  Millar's  house  in  Magask,  where  they  concerted  the  business ;  and  it  is 
deponed  also,  that  the  next  night  they  lodged  at  Ptobert  Black's  house  in 
Baldiuny,  whose  wife,  they  depone,  was  a  great  instigator  of  the  fact;  and 
that  at  parting,  when  one  of  them  kissed  her,  she  prayed  God  might  bless 
and  prosper  them  ;  and  added  these  words,  If  long  Leslie  (this  was  Mr. 
Alexander  Leslie,  Minister  at  Cires)  be  with  him,  lay  him  011  the  green  also. 
To  which  the  ruffian  answered,  holding  up  his  hand,  There  is  the  hand  that 
shall  do  it."  Further  it  is  deponed,  "That  the  said  Andrew  Turnbull  (who 
was  one  of  the  two  that  came  to  Kennoway  the  night  before),  at  his  return 
to  the  other  assassines,  encouraged  them  to  the  fact,  by  telling  them  that 
all  the  West  was  in  arms  already." 

But  that  this  was  a  long  and  deep  laid  plot,  not  only  to  assassinate  the 
Primate,  but  many  others,  and  then  immediately  to  break  out  into  an  open 
Rebellion,  will  appear  to  a  demonstration,  from  two  Papers  (which  the 
Author  of  the  following  Narrative  had  not  seen  when  he  wrote  it,  one 
whereof  was  dropt  at  the  Market  Cross  of  Cowpar,  some  days  before  the 
Murder,  a  Copy  whereof  the  Reader  will  find  in  the  Appendix  (Numb.  ILj; 
and  this  Paper  I  find  particularly  noticed  by  his  Majesty  in  his  Answer  to 
the  Privy  Council's  Letter,  wherein  they  acquaint  him  with  the  amazing 
news  of  the  Murder ;  which  Letter  of  theirs  our  Author  has  insert  in  his 
Appendix ;  and  the  Answer,  Dated  May  the  10th,  chiefly  because  it  was  all 
VOL.  n.  c 


18  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

penned  by  his  Majesty  himself,  I  have  also  set  clown  f  Xitmb.  III.  j  The  other 
Paper  is  yet  a  more  pregnant  evidence  of  this  truth,  being  an  attested  double 
of  a  Letter  from  a  fanatical  teacher  to  his  dear  brother,  Mr.  Donald  Cargill, 
the  same  day  the  Murder  was  committed.  The  principal  Letter  was  inter 
cepted,  and  sent  up  with  other  Papers  to  the  Duke  of  Lauderdale,  to  be 
communicated  to  the  King.  But  by  the  attested  Copy  I  have  by  me,  it  does 
appear,  that  not  only  the  Archbishop,  but  several  others,  \verc  designed  to 
be  murdered,  and  a  Rebellion  to  be  raised ;  which  Paper,  because  it  was 
never  as  yet  in  Print,  is  also  set  down  in  the  AppouH.c  f  Xiinib.  IV.) 

Further  yet,  I  am  credibly  informed,  that  the  contrivers  of  that  horrid 
Assassination  were  so  full  of  it,  that  some  of  them  could  scarce  keep  their 
own  secret;  which  one  of  their  teachers,  some  while  before  the  Murder,  thus 
blabbed  out  in  Rhyme — 

••  If  Sharp  do  die  the  common  death  of  men, 
I'll  burn  my  books  and  throw  away  my  pen." 

Prophecy.  This,  among  the  poor  deluded  wretches  their  ordinary  hearers,  passed  for  the 
spirit  of  Prophecy;  but  herein  they  have,  it  seems,  taken  their  copy  from 
one  of  their  great  apostles,  Mr.  Baxter,  who  in  his  "Defence  of  the  Cure  of 
Church  Divisions,"  p.  200,  speaking  to  the  Bishops  and  Clergy,  says,  "It 
may  be  your  great  patrons  may  die  or  fall,  or  forsake  you,  and  then  your 
hearts  are  broken ;  it  may  be  Death  may  enter  into  your  families,  and  make 
you  think  what  blood-thirstiness  doth  tend  to."  Now  what  manner  of  Fall 
and  Death  he  means,  he  explains,  p.  201,  "  One  Felton  may  end  the  great 
Duke  of  Buckingham;"  p.  205,  "  Or  they  may  meet  with  such  executioners 
as  Cardinal  Bcthune."  Nor  was  Mr.  Baxter  a  false  prophet,  tho  a  very 
bloody  one,  as  the  tragical  Narrative  now  before  us  doth  sadly  witness. 

As  to  Mr.  Wodrow's  Account  of  the  fact  itself,  the  Reader  will  be  pleased 
to  remember  his  vouchers,  which  I  have  already  touched  at,  and  compare 
them  with  those  of  the  Narratives  of  it  Published  by  Authority.  But  these 
three  things  I  cannot  forbear  to  notice.  1.  That  the  fauaticks  are  very  fond 
to  make  Dr.  Sharp  die  in  the  same  manner,  and  almost  with  the  same  cir 
cumstances,  as  Cardinal  Bethunc  did;  and  were  Mr.  Wodrow's  Narrative 
true,  it  would  be  indeed  next  to  a  miracle  how  John  Balfour,  the  leader  of 
those  ruffians,  should  have  so  exactly  repeated  to  tho  Archbishop,  when  he 
was  upon  the  point  of  murdering  him,  almost  the  very  words  of  James  Melvil 
to  the  Cardinal,  as  if  he  had  mandated  them  from  Knox's  History  (see  col. 
ii.,  p.  80,  in  fin.)  And  which  is  yet  stranger,  he  makes  the  Archbishop  use 
the  same  expressions  that  Knox  tells  us  the  Cardinal  had  at  his  Assassina 
tion,  viz.,  "Fy,  fy,"  &c.  2.  It  is  positively  averred  by  Mr.  Wodrow,  and  in 
the  above-cited  Paper,  intitled  "A  True  Relation  of  what  is  discovered,"  £c., 
Sharp  shot-  "  ^hat  ^ie  Archbishop  was  shot-proof,  and  that  after  pouring  in  many  vollies 
proof.  upon  his  body,  he  was  still  safe  and  sound,"  insinuating  that  childish  fancy, 

as  if  he  had  some  spell  or  talisman  to  secure  him.    And  Mr.  Wodrow  further 


JAMES  SHAEP.  It) 

says,  "  That  they  found  in  his  pocket  a  box  with  some  pistol  balls,  thrceds 
of  worsted,  and  some  odd  things  in  it."  Kay,  for  this,  the  Authors  of  the 
foresaid  "  True  Eolation, "  &c.,  have  the  impudence  to  appeal  to  "\Villiam 
Borthwick,  Chirurgeon,  who  was  one  of  four  sent  over  by  the  Privy  Council 
to  visit  and  embalm  the  body ;  to  him,  I  say,  they  appeal,  whether  he  found 
blue  or  black  marks  only  instead  of  wounds,  wherever  a  ball  had  lighted. 
And  yet  this  same  Mr.  Borthwick,  with  two  other  Chirurgcons  and  a  Phy 
sician,  declare  under  their  hands,  "  That  he  had  a  wound,  by  a  ball,  below 
the  right  clavicle,  betwixt  the  second  and  third  rib."  "Which  declaration, 
extant  in  the  Eccords,  I  have  Transcribed  in  the  Appendix  (  Xuinli.  V.  ]  3.  As 
Knox  makes  Mclvil  say  to  the  Cardinal,  "  That  neither  hatred  to  his  person 
nor  desire  of  his  wealth,  moved  him  to  kill  him"  (and  yet  those  self-denied 
gentlemen  seised  a  great  deal  of  treasure  and  rich  furniture  in  the  Castle), 
so  here  Mr.  AVodrow  makes  Balfour  to  say,  "  Thy  money  perish  with  thee," 
d-c.,  p.  31  ;  and  a  little  thereafter  says,  "  That  they  took  nothing  but  papers 
and  arms."  And  yet  by  the  Depositions  upon  Eccord,  it  appears,  "  That 
they  robbed  the  Primate's  daughter  of  all  her  gold,  and  other  things  she  had 
in  a  little  box,  and  carried  away  his  Grace's  night-bag,  Bible,  girdle,  some 
papers  of  moment,"  &c.,  and  also  robbed  his  servants  not  only  of  their  arms 
but  their  money. 

I  am  loath  to  detain  the  Ecader  any  longer  from  this  short  but  true  Preservation  of 
History  itself ;  only 'tis  worth  our  while  to  notice  two  observes  upon  the 
Primate's  Death,  made  by  Mr.  AYodrow.  One  is  an  insinuation  of  God's 
approbation  of  the  fact,  by  the  impunity  of  the  actors,  which  he  tells  us  with 
several  circumstances  that  in  his  Account  amount  to  little  less  than  miracles, 
such  as  (p.  32,  Fr.j,  "That  their  preservation  was  a  wonder  [such  as  that 
of  most  of  the  King's  murderers  after  the  Eestoration] ;  because,  when  this 
fact  was  a  doing  in  the  open  fields  [but  if  he  knew  those  fields  as  well  as  the 
Author  of  this  Preface  docs,  he  would  cease  to  wonder],  at  the  height  of  the 
day,  in  this  season  of  the  year,  and  so  many  pieces  discharged,  they  wrere 
neither  interrupted  nor  discovered!"  which  last  is  a  manifest  untruth.  He 
adds  (p.  33;,  "  That  none  of  the  real  actors  were  taken"  (he  might  at  least 
have  excepted  Eathillet  and  Guilan) ;  and  then,  2dly,  repeats  what  he  had 
so  often  before  inculcated,  "That  it  was  ill  reasoning  and  unfair  to  lodge 
this  fact  upon  the  whole  party,"  &c.  And  this  leads  me  to  the  last  thing  I 
proposed  in  this  Preface,  which  is  to  show,  that  whoever  pretends  to  call 
himself  a  true  Presbyterian,  must  necessarily  approve  of  this  action,  as  not 
only  lawful  but  heroical.  We  do  not,  indeed,  in  as  many  words,  find  this 
asserted  in  their  Confession  of  Faith,  Covenant,  &c.,  th6  from  some  of  their 
positions  and  solemn  engagements  there,  'tis  not  uneasy  to  infer  this  by  way 
of  consequence ;  but  'tis  hoped  it  will  be  next  to  that,  directly  to  draw  it 
from  the  writings  of  their  greatest  Apostles,  whom  our  modern  Presbyterians 
look  upon  to  have  been  divinely  inspired,  and  none  of  whose  Books  they 
ever  yet  offered  to  disown  as  unsound. 


20  ABCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  AXDliEWS. 

Here,  then,  I  shall  first  instance  the  horrid  Murder  of  Cardinal  Bctlmnc, 
as  related  hy  Knox,  l.s/  Edit.,  ;>.  143,  1-44,  145,  where,  after  having  intro 
duced  James  Melvil,  making  just  such  another  harrangue  to  him  as  Mr. 
Wodrow  puts  in  the  mouth  of  John  Balfour,  the  murderer  of  Bishop  Sharp, 
he  tells  us,  "That  after  his  exhorting  him  to  repentance,  yet  he  allowed  him 
no  more  time  for  that  great  work  than  was  spent  in  delivering  the  speech." 
Nevertheless,  Knox  there  calls  that  speech,  with  what  presently  followed 
thereupon,  viz.,  Melvil's  assassinating  the  Cardinal,  the  "  godly  words  and 
deed  of  James  Melvil."  But  least  this  should  be  only  thought  a  Hash  of 
heat  peculiar  rather  to  the  fiery  Scottish  genius  than  to  the  spirit  of  Presby 
tery  in  general,  we  have  the  joint  suffrages  of  two  famous  moderate  English 
Presbyterian  Teachers  to  make  good  the  charge.  Thus  Goodman,  in  his 
Goodman.  «  fyranny  and  Popery,"  ]>.  27,  tells  us,"'-  That  all  men  arc  bound  to  see  the 
laws  of  God  kept,  and  suppress  and  resist  idolatry  by  force;  and  that  it  is 
not  enough  for  subjects  to  disobey  the  wicked  orders  of  their  Prince,  but  that 
it  is  their  indispcusiblc  duty  to  resist  them,  and  deliver  God's  children  out 
of  their  enemies'  hands,  as  a  sheep  is  delivered  from  the  wolf.  And  if  the 
Magistrate  refuses  to  put  Mass-mongers  and  false  Preachers  [and  such  aro 
all  Protestant  Bishops  and  Clergymen,  in  the  Presbyterian  Account]  to 
death,  the  people,  in  doing  it  for  them,  do  shew  that  zeal  to  God's  glory 
which  the  Scripture  commends  in  Phincas."  But  Gilby  goes  yet  a  little 
further,  and  plainly  tells  us,  "  That  Princes  derive  their  authority  from  the 
people,  which  the  people,  upon  occasion,  may  take  from  them  again,  just  as 
a  man  may  revoke  his  proxy ;"  nay,  boldly  says,  that  'tis  warrantable  to  kill 
wicked  Kings;  and  such,  in  their  Account,  arc  all  anti-covcnanting  Kings. 
"  The  subjects  (says  he)  killed  Athalia  ;  Jehu  killed  Jczabel ;  Elijah,  thu  no 
Magistrate,  killed  the  Queen's  Chaplains,  Baal's  Priests."  And  Leichtoii, 
in  his  "  Zioii's  Plea,"  asscrtcth,  (i  That  Felton's  killing  the  Duke  of  Buck 
ingham  was  a  heroical  and  laudable  fact,"  and  recommends  it  to  posterity 
for  imitation. 

Further,  we  find  that  Knox,  in  his  Debate  with  Secretary  Lethington, 
as  set  clown  by  himself,  Uixl.,  j>.  390,  justifies  the  killing  of  tyrannical 
Princes,  and  all  others  in  publick  place,  by  private  persons,  from  the  example 
of  Phiucas,  who,  he  says,  was  but  a  private  person ;  and  tells  us,  that  he 
had  not  only  a  large  reward  for  his  fact,  but  an  ample  approbation  of  it 
( Xunib.  .r.cr.  12,  13,  compared  with  PxaL  ci'i.  31) ;  so  that  it  was  accounted 
to  him  for  righteousness,  i.e.,  as  a  righteous  action  ;  and  roundly  tells  him, 
"  That  it  is  to  be  imitated  by  all  those  who  prefer  the  true  honour  of  the 
true  worship  and  glory  of  God  to  the  affection  of  fleshly  and  wicked  Princes." 
Nay,  further  adds,  "  That  this  example  of  Phiucas,  being  approved  by  God, 
stands  to  us  instead  of  a  command ;  for  as  God  in  His  nature  is  constant 
and  immutable,  so  can  He  not  condemn  in  the  ages  subsequent  that  which 
He  hath  approved  in  His  servants  before  us." 

It  will  be  needless  here  to  make  any  quotations  out  of  their  great  chain- 


JAMES  SHARP.  21 

pion  Buchanan,  his  whole  Book,  7V  Jure  llajni  apud  Scotnx,  being  but  one  Buchanan, 
intire  vindication  of  those  execrable  practices,  and  his  lying  and  calumnious 
History  nothing  else  but  a  Comment  on  that  text,  to  which  he  exactly 
accommodates  it.  Let  us  hear  but  one  passage  of  the  former,  where  he 
sticks  not  to  say  "That  the  only  remedy  against  tyrants  [viz.,  all  in  author 
ity  who  will  not  govern  according  to  the  freak  of  the  mob,  whom  alone  he 
makes  judge  in  that  case]  is  Ehud's  dagger,  to  which,  as  the  Supreme  Court 
of  Justice,  Moses  brought  the  Egyptian;  Phineas,  Zimri  and  Cosbi ;  Ehud, 
Eglon;  Sampson,  the  Philistines;  Samuel,  Agag;  and  Jehojada,  Athalia,"  £c. 
Next  to  these  I  shall  mention  an  Author  who,  thu  later,  is  yet  held  in 
as  great  veneration  by  the  party  as  any  yet  named,  and  that  is  the  Author 
of  "Xaphtali,"  who,  p.  131,  exhorts  "all  people  to  acquit  themselves  like  ., 

Isaphtali. 

men,  and  pull  the  Bishops  out  of  the  Sanctuary,  that  the  wrath  of  God  may 
be  averted  in  the  righteous  punishment  of  these  wicked  men."  Accordingly, 
Mr.  James  Mitchel  attempted  to  murder  Dr.  Sharp,  and  in  his  speech  saith, 
"  They  are  all  blessed  that  shall  take  the  proud  Prelates  and  dash  their 
brains  against  the  stones."  And  what  was  first  attempted  by  him  in  vain 
(thu,  by  the  by,  no  man  ever  yet  failed  in  achieving  an  hcroical  act  to  which 
he  was  moved  by  God),  was  eleven  years  thereafter  successfully  effected  by 
a  company  of  true  Presbyterians,  some  of  whom  had  long  rode  in  Mr. 
Welsh's  Guard.  That  same  Author  defends  the  Rebellion  at  Pentland-hilLs 
from  the  same  instance  of  Phiueas,  and  blasphemously  ascribes  it  to  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God;  asserting  "  That  those  Rebels  were  no  more  to  be  con 
demned  as  traitors,  than  Phineas  ought  to  have  been  for  a  murderer,  seeing 
they  were  led  by  the  same  Spirit,  and  had  as  good  warrant  as  he,"  p.  21  et 
sajij.  And  all  these  afore-cited  Doctrines  and  their  Authors  arc  strenuously 
vindicated  by  the  Author  of  JHK  FopuJi  Vimlicatum,  cap.  20,  from  p«y.  409  to 
pwj.  42G.  In  short,  "Xaphtali"  and  Jus  T'opuli  ViinUadian  were,  in  King 
Charles  II.  his  time,  the  Presbyterian  pocket-books ;  and  it  was  then  observed 
that  the  common  people  read  them,  especially  the  former,  as  much  or  more 
than  the  Bible.  A  learned  English  Author  (.Dr.  Hickes)  of  those  times  tells 
us,  "  That  he  knew  an  Officer  of  his  Majesty's  Forces,  who,  meeting  with  a 
country  fellow  going  to  a  Eicld  Conventicle,  examined  and  searched  him, 
and  in  one  pocket  found  '  Xapthali,'  and  in  the  other  a  pocket  pistol  charged 
with  two  bullets  :  the  Doctrine  (as  the  gentleman  ingeniously  said)  in  one 
pocket,  and  the  use  or  application  in  the  other."  The  Author  adds,  "  That 
as  he  was  credibly  informed,  that  pernicious  Book  was  found  in  the  pockets 
of  most  of  those  who  were  killed  or  taken  at  Bothwel  Bridge." 

From  these  celebrated  Authors,  then,  we  have  the  true  principles  on  Severe  criti- 
which  Presbyterians  found  their  terrible  practice  of  massacres  and  assassina-  fj'sms  on.tlie 
tions.     For  beside  those  above  cited,  Calvin,  Beza,  Melvil,  &c.,  do  all  main-  cipies"  of  the 
tain,  "  That  when  the  Magistrate  will  not  put  to  death  such  as  they  are 
pleased  to  call  enemies  of  Christ,  the  Church  (I.e.,  private  persons)  may  do 
it,  by  the  example  of  Phineas  ;  nay,  that  they  ought  to  do  it  without  hesita- 


22  AKCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  AXD11EWS. 

tion,  when  they  feel  tliemsclvcs  moved  thereto.  But  that  if  the  Magistrates 
themselves  be  such,  then  any  other  person,  thu  not  in  ofiice,  may  and  ought 
to  rise  up  to  do  justice  upon  them  (the  King  not  exceptcd),  still  after  the 
example  of  Phincas."  Yet,  least  any  man  should  be  startled  at  so  terrible 
a  Doctrine,  which  plainly  unhinges  all  humane  society,  the  Author  of  Jus 
Populi  Viiidicdliiin  adds,  p.  412,  "That  notwithstanding  this  Doctrine,  all 
persons  have  sufficient  security  of  their  lives,  except  such  as  are  guilty  of 
dreadful  Apostacy  [with  which  they  charge  all  who  have  renounced  the 
Covenant,  or  who  took  it  and  do  not  keep  it ;  in  particular,  the  King  and 
the  Archbishop],  causing  the  plague  of  God  to  break  in  upon  the  land,'' 
which  he  pursues  at  full  length,^,  414,  415,  where  again  and  again  he  urges 
the  example  of  Phincas  to  encourage  private  men  to  murder  the  Archbishop. 
In  fine,  that  this  is  the  general  Presbyterian  Doctrine,  I  appeal  not  only  to 
"Naphtali"  and  Jus  J'd/mli  Yiinliculioii,  but  to  the  "Apology,"  the  "Apolo- 
getical  Narration,"  the  "Poor  Man's  Cup,"  the  "History  of  the  Indulgence," 
the  "  Hind  let  Loose,"  fee.,  who  all  of  them  sing  the  same  note. 

Mr.  "\Vodrow  pretends  to  answer  this  charge,  ml.  2,  [xujc  33,  as  the  same 
stands  in  a  Book  Printed  in  the  year  1080,  entitled  "  The  Spirit  of  Popery 
speaking  out  of  the  mouths  of  Phanatical  Protestants,"  &c.,  Avherc  some  of 
the  most  pregnant  of  the  above-cited  testimonies  arc  set  down ;  but,  then, 
all  his  answer  comes  to  this,  "  That  none  of  that  Author's  citations  come  at 
all  up  to  the  present  case  of  the  Archbishop's  Murder."  This  is  an  easy 
way  of  answering  the  strongest  demonstrations  that  ever  were  used  to  prove 
any  thing.  For  thus  may  the  Deists  answer  Doctor  Lesly  and  others,  that 
all  their  arguments  come  not  up  to  the  case  of  llevcal'd  Pieligion.  Since, 
therefore,  Mr.  Wodrow  does  not  make  appear  any  disparity  betwixt  the 
above-cited  Doctrines  and  the  practice  of  the  Archbishop's  murderers,  all 
AVC  can  do  is  to  leave  it  to  the  judgement  of  any  intelligent  Reader,  be  his 
principles  what  they  will,  whether  the  said  Murder  was  a  plain  consequence 
or  rather  application  of  the  above-cited  Doctrines. 

But  since  Mr.  Wodrow  pretends  to  disown  all  assassinations,  I  could 
almost  appeal  to  himself,  whether  it  had  been  more  ingenuous  and  fair  in 
him,  since  the  above-named  Authors  do  not  only  defend,  but  commend  such 
murders  as  plain  duty,  to  have  fairly  and  frankly  said,  that  these  Authors, 
however  otherwise  burning  and  shining  lights,  were  yet  in  this  point  wrong, 
and  overborn  by  mistaken  zeal,  however  good  their  intentions  were ;  and 
that  therefore  he,  and  all  modern  Presbyterians,  humbly  differ  from  them  as 
to  that  head.  But  bluntly  to  say,  that  such  clear  and  plain  expressions  as 
are  above  cited  come  not  up  to  the  present  case,  is  a  way  of  reasoning 
peculiar  to  Mr.  Wodrow. 

Field  Conven-  I  shall  only  further  remark  two  groundless  and  malicious  calumnies  of 

tides.  this  eminent  Martyrologist,  in  his  Account  of  the  Proclamation  in  April, 

1G79,  against  Field  Conventicles,  vol.  2,  pay.  38,  39.     And  (to  pass  by  his 

ignorant  and  impertinent  observes  upon  it)  in  the  first  place,  I  find  that  he 


JAMES  SHARP.  23 

charges  Doctor  Sharp  as  being  the  Author  and  chief  promoter  of  that  Pro 
clamation  (which  indeed  was  his  duty,  had  it  heen  true),  and  says,  "  That  it 
may  be  reckoned  the  Primate's  Legacy,  and  an  earnest  of  what  he  would 
have  essayed  had  he  got  up  to  Court ;"  which  still  insinuates  a  further  vin 
dication  of  the  Murder.  But  this  is  neither  less  nor  more  than  a  manifest 
falshood ;  nor  does  he  pretend  to  give  either  reason  or  voucher  for  what  he 
says.  The  other  is  a  wicked  untruth,  viz.,  "  That  all  of  the  Privy  Council 
saw  need,  before  the  Proclamation  was  Published,  to  have  it  Signed  by  the 
King,  that  this  might  be  a  Warrant  to  them  if  afterwards  called  to  account 
for  it."  The  falshood  of  this  will  appear  from  his  Majesty's  Answer  to  the 
Council's  Letter,  wherein  the  Proclamation  was  sent  up  enclosed ;  whereby 
it  is  evident,  that  the  Signing  of  it  by  the  King  was  not  at  all  moved  or 
desired  by  them,  but  that  it  proceeded  entirely  from  himself:  therefore  I 
have  inserted  the  Answer  itself  in  the  Ai>i>emlii-  (  Xinnb.  VI.),  because  it  seems 
not  to  have  been  seen  by  the  Author  of  the  following  Sheets. 

Lastly,  lest  any  man  should  mistake  our  Author's  meaning  in  this  Abp.  Burnct 
Narrative,  where  he  says,  "  That  the  reverend  and  pious  Doctor  Burnct, 
Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  Demitted  his  Dignity  and  Charge  upon  passing  of 
the  Act  of  Supremacy  in  the  year  1009,"  the  Pleader  will  be  pleased  k>  be 
informed,  that  this  was  not  a  simple  Demission,  far  less  done  in  a  pet  (which 
would  indeed  have  been  an  unpardonable  fault  in  that  great  and  good  man), 
but  only  in  obedience  to  his  Majesty's  Letter  to  the  Privy  Council,  whereby 
he  is  prohibited  to  Officiate,  only  till  the  King's  further  pleasure.  And  who 
procured  this  disgrace  to  him,  is  pretty  well  known  to  some  Presbyterians 
yet  alive  in  Scotland.  This  one  thing  is  certain,  that  he,  as  well  as  Doctor 
Sharp,  was  a  strenuous  opposer  of  the  Act  of  Supremacy  when  brought  in 
before  the  Parliament.  In  a  dutiful  compliance,  therefore,  with  his  Majesty's 
pleasure,  he  simply  declared  to  his  Clergy  that  he  was  not  to  act  as  their 
Ordinary  any  more,  till  the  King  should  please  to  allow  him.  (This  was  far 
from  the  Presbyterian  spirit.)  Accordingly,  we  see  Doctor  Leighton,  Bishop 
of  Dumblain,  was  never  formally  Translated  to  the  See  of  Glasgow,  but  only 
made  Administrator  during  his  Majesty's  pleasure  ;  who,  finding  at  length 
how  he  had  been  misinformed  and  abused  by  his  own  ungrateful  servant,  to 
whom  all  this  was  owing,  not  only  restored  Doctor  Buruet  to  his  former 
Dignity  and  Charge,  but  afterwards  promoted  him  to  the  See  of  St.  Andrews. 


APPENDIX  TO  THE  PREFACE. 
NUMB.  I. 


D.  Sir, — I  think  it  proper  to  let  you  know  what  sort  of  a  person  Isabel  Bell  Lindsay's 
Lindsay  was,  before  I  say  any  thing  of  the  story  about  her.     She  was  (by  ?lia™cter  and 
those  who  were  perfectly  well  acquainted  with  her)  look'd  upon  as  a  woman  in 
crack-brain'd  and  very  fanciful,  as  by  what  follows  you'll  easily  perceive. 


24  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

She  told  the  person  I  had  it  from  (whose  veracity  I  can  rely  as  much  upon 
as  if  she  had  said  it  to  my  self),  that  one  day  when  she  was  living  at  Inver- 
clevit,  she  saw  a  man  and  a  black  horse  rise  out  of  the  midst  of  the  Paver  of 
Tay,  and  rid  North.  My  Author  ask'd  what  time  of  the  day  it  was.  She 
said,  In  fair  sunshine.  And  her  head  run  so  much  upon  Witches,  that  she 
frequently  complain'd  there  was  no  course  now  taken  with  them,  which  was 
not  wont  to  he,  and  actually  scandalized  an  honest  woman  for  being  one, 
which  she  complained  of  to  the  Ministers  of  this  place,  and  they  were  much 
troubled  about  it ;  for  they  were  convinced  the  honest  woman  was  innocent, 
and  the  accuser  most  malicious ;  for  all  the  ground  she  had  for  it  was,  that 
the  honest  woman's  husband,  when  melancholy,  called  her  an  old  witch. 
And  when  she  would  have  gone  to  her  cellar  and  heard  rats,  she  used  to  say 
over  and  over  again,  God  keep  me  from  witches.  And  I  am  told,  that  she 
reported  she  once  saw  Archbishop  Sharp,  Dr.  Pittullo,  and  Mr.  Robert  Rait, 
Minister  of  Dundee,  all  dancing  in  the  air;  by  all  which  you  may  guess 
what  sort  of  a  person  she  Avas.  Her  rising  and  speaking  in  the  Church  on 
a  Sunday  forenoon  was  this  :  When  the  Primate  was  Preaching,  and  when 
the  7th  ver.  of  the  (>2  Psal.,  "In  God  my  glory  placed  is,"  was  read,  she 
said,  "Your  glory,  your  glory,  my  glory,  my  glory's  placed  in  God;"  but  she 
kept  her  scat  all  the  time  of  Psalms  and  Prayer;  but  when  the  Sermon 
began,  she  rose  and  called  him  Judas,  or  some  such  expression;  and  the 
people  that  were  next  her  clapt  their  hands  on  her  mouth,  that  she  got  very 
little  spoke,  for  she  was  instantly  taken  to  prison ;  and  when  there,  was 
asked  if  she  had  any  thing  to  say  to  the  Archbishop,  and  she  should  be 
carried  to  him,  she  said  No,  and  she  would  not  hear  an  ill  word  of  him. 
This  is  the  substance  of  Avhat  passed  at  that  time  (which  is  about  50  years 
ago),  that  these  that  Avere  then  men  and  women  remember.  As  for  her 
bringing  forth  a  child,  and  it  being  murdered,  its  a  most  malicious,  hellish, 
and  devilish  calumny ;  and  for  its  being  begot  under  promise  of  Marriage, 
he  Avas  always  worth  the  Availing  upon,  and  she  Avas  Married  several  years 
before  him. 

NUMB.  II. 

Katharine  Dear  Sir, — I  return  you  my  hearty  thanks  for  the  Book  you  sent  me, 

Moncricff.  which  is  the  most  scurrilous  rhapsody  of  malicious  calumny  that  ever  was 
invented.  As  to  that  story  in  the  Preface,  of  the  Primate's  sister-in-hiAV 
being  sent  to  the  North  Avith  child,  I  reckon  it  necessary  to  give  you  the 
following  Account  of  that  silly,  simple,  senseless  Avoman,  Katharine  Mon- 
crieff.  A  feAV  years  after  the  Restoration,  Mr.  John  Cuningham,  the  Earl 
of  Glencairn's  son,  AA'hile  a  student  here,  took  a  fever ;  and  that  he  might 
be  the  better  taken  care  of,  the  Archbishop  brought  him  to  his  OAVH  house ; 
and  during  his  sickness,  this  poor  unhappy  Avoman  sometimes  -went  to  his 
room. ;  and  after  he  recover'd,  and  had  left  the  place,  she  told  some  of  the 
servants  that  she  was  with  child  (Avhich  she  seemed  very  fond  of)  to  Mr. 
Cuningham.  This  coming  to  her  sister's  ears,  she  presently  told  her  husband 
of  it,  Avho  immediately  ordered  a  man  and  a  horse  to  be  got  ready,  and  carry 
her  to  CoAvpar  (and  never  in  all  his  life  saAv  her  again),  where  two  of  her 
sisters  were  then  living ;  and  after  that,  she  Aveut  and  lived  at  Crail  alone 
with  a  servant,  and  proved  not  to  be  Avith  child.  But  some  time  after,  she 
fell  with  child  to  a  millar,  a  married  man  in  Balcomie  Ground,  and  satisfied 
as  an  adulteress  in  the  Church  of  Crail.  After  this  they  went  aAvay  together, 


JAMES  SHAEP.  25 

but  she  returned  back  again  before  the  fellow  ;  at  last  he  returned  also,  and 
then  the  friends  fearing  they  might  renew  their  acquaintance,  sent  her  to 
the  Xorth.  I  am  credibly  informed  she  was  not  with  child  at  that  time,  and 
th  6  she  had  been,  it  says  nothing  against  the  Primate,  for  it  was  five  or  six 
years  after  she  went  from  his  family. 

XI-MIJ.  III. 
Copy  of  (i  Pafn'r  di-ojit  on  tin'  Sfn'i't  «/'  ('<nc)>ar,  a  far  ihii/a  l<]fnre  tin'  Nunler  of 


To  all  and  sundry  to  whose  hands  these  Presents  shall  come,  but  especially 

to  the  Magistrates  and  Inhabitants  of  the  Town  of  Cowpar  in  Fife. 
Be  it  known  to  all  men.  that  whereas  under  a  pretext  of  Law,  tho  most  (jupar.Fife 
falsly,  there  is  most  abominable,  illegal,  and  oppressive  robberies  and  spoils  Paper. 
committed  in  this   Shire,  by  Captain  Carnegie  and  his  Souldiers,  by  virtue 
of  a  Precept  from  AYilliam  Carmichael,  XT.,  he  being  authori/ed  and  held  on 
to  it  by  that  perjured  apostate  Prelate  Sharp,  who,  Xc.     These  are  therefore 
to  declare  to  all  that  shall  any  ways  be  concerned  in  this  villainous  robbery 
and  oppression,  either  by  assisting,  rccepting,  levying,  or  any  manner  of  way 
countenancing  the  same,  that  they  shall  be  holden  as  guilty  thereof;  and 
however  they  may  think  themselves  for  the  present   secured,  being  guarded 
by  a  military  force,  and  those  that  are  thus  robbed  despiseable,  yet  let  them 
take  this  for  a  warning  that  they  shall  be  handled  severely,  answerable  to 
their  villanies,  and  that  by  a  party  equal  to  all  that  dare  own  them,  and  that 
shortly,  as  God  shall  enable  and  assist  them,  whose  names  may  be  read  in 
these  following  Letters,  A,  ]>.  C.  &C. 

XT-MI;.  IV. 

CHARLES  E.  —  Eight  trusty,  XT.,  we  greet  you  well.  It  was  with  no  loss  King  Charles' 
abhorrence  than  surprisal.  that  in  your  Letter  of  the  -1th  instant  (in  a  flying  gratulation. 
Packet)  we  received  an  Account  of  that  cruel  and  barbarous  Murder  com 
mitted  the  day  before,  by  ten  fanatick  ruffians,  upon  tho  person  of  the  late 
Lord  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  within  two  miles  of  that  place  ;  an  action 
attended  with  so  many  circumstances  of  inhumanity  and  barbarity,  as  that, 
were  it  not  ccrtiiied  unto  us  from  so  good  hands,  we  could  not  have  believed 
that  in  any  Xation  civilized,  much  less  where  Christianity  is  professed,  there 
could  have  been  such  a  hellish  design  contrived,  much  less  put  in  execution: 
a  villany  so  abominable  to  us  (and  must  certainly  be  so  to  all  good  men), 
that  were  it  committed  but  upon  the  meanest  of  our  subjects,  in  place  of  the 
Metropolitan  of  that  our  ancient  Kingdom,  and  one  of  our  Privy  Council, 
we  could  not  but  resent  it  with  the  most  severe  effects  of  our  displeasure  and 
abhorrence  ;  and  therefore  we  cannot  but  highly  commend  (and  return  you 
our  hearty  thanks  for)  your  great  care  and  forwardness  (even  upon  the  first 
notice  of  that  horrid  fact)  to  take  the  most  effectual  course  for  discovering  and 
apprehending  those  barbarous  assasines,  in  order  to  their  exemplary  punish 
ment  and  the  terror  of  others  of  the  same  bloody  and  hellish  principles  from 
ever  daring  to  attempt  such  a  villany  hereafter;  and  particularly  the  Procla 
mation  you  have  Published  upon  that  occasion,  with  which  we  were  so  well 
pleased,  that  we  did  immediately  order  it  to  be  Printed  here.  Vvre  have  also 
seen  the  Depositions  of  the  "Witnesses,  and  the  Copy  of  that  scandalous  and 
VOL.  n.  D 


26  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDREWS. 

seditious  Paper  that  was  dropt  in  the  Town  of  Cowpar ;  by  which  last  we 
perceive  that,  in  all  appearance,  the  design  of  that  horrid  Murder  was  laid 
sometime  before  by  a  more  considerable  number  of  men  than  the  assassines 
were;  and  therefore  we  do  in  a  particular  manner  recommend  to  you  to 
make  all  the  enquiry  and  search  that  is  possible,  for  all  persons  that  you 
have  reason  to  suspect  any  manner  of  way  guilty  of  contriving,  consulting, 
abbetting,  or  furthering  that  horrid  villany.  For  we  do  look  upon  them  as 
no  less  guilty  thereof  than  the  wretches  that  assumed  the  boldness  and 
impiety  to  shed  that  innocent  blood,  and  that  to  so  high  a  degree  of  cruelty 
and  barbarity  as  can  hardly  be  paralleled  in  any  Nation  ;  which  we  do  so 
much  abominate,  as  we  cannot  but  again  earnestly  desire  you  to  take  the 
most  effectual  courses,  consistent  with  Law,  for  punishing  to  the  outmost 
severity  all  such  as  shall  lie  found  guilty  of  or  accessory  to  that  horrid  and 
execrable  crime  :  for  doing  whereof,  this  shall  be  to  you  and  all  others  that 
may  be  therein  concerned  a  full  Warrant.  By  a  former  Letter,  we  sent  for 
some  of  your  number  to  come  hither,  and  after  we  have  spoke  with  them 
you  shall  find  that  we  are  fully  resolved  to  maintain  and  assert  the  authority 
exercised  by  you,  and  that  we  will  not  cease  to  ail'ord  you  our  countenance 
and  protection  in  the  faithful  discharge  of  that  great  trust  we  have  committed 
to  you.  And  so  we  bid  you  heartily  farewell. — (liven  at  our  Court  at  White 
hall  the  tenth  day  of  May,  1070,  and  of  our  Reign  the  Hist  year.  By  his 
Majesty's  command.  LAUJHCRDALK. 

XlTMl!.    A'. 

Extraordinary  Dearly  beloved  Brother, — I  am  glad  to  hear  your  welfare,  and  that  you 

mcntan  D°CU"  contmnc  m  <nc  faith,  which  I  wish  you  may  retain,  and  persevere  in  to  the 
end.  You  shall  know  that  our  forces  daily  encrcase,  and  are  now  surmounted 
to  the  number  of  10,000,  and  there  are  daily  adding  to  the  number  of  those 
who  shall  be  saved.  I  hope  you  have  heard  of  the  dreadful  death  of  the 
old  fox  who  was  clothed  with  the  sheep's  skin  and  countenanced  with  the 
King's  authority.  The  same  was  intended  for  others  also,  but  it  seems  (lod 
hath  not  altogether  forsaken  them,  and  given  them  over  to  themselves  ;  but 
it  may  be  supposed  that  they  arc  referred  to  a  greater  judgment,  which  God 
in  His  own  appointed  time  will  cause  fall  upon  them,  and  send  deliverance 
to  His  people,  which  shall  be  the  daily  prayers  of  him  who  greets  you  in  the 
Lord.  I  am  informed  that  the  King  is  sending  down  5000  English,  under 
the  command  of  the  Duke  of  Monmouth,  to  assist  the  Prelaticall  party,  and 
to  suppress  the  Godly;  but  God  knows  how  to  deliver  the  just  from  the  hand 
of  their  enemies.  Bat  I  hope  within  a  few  moneths  we  shall  sec  an  end  of 
tliir  things,  and  then  shall  the  righteous  flourish  like  a  palm  tree.  Which 
shall  be  the  evening,  morning,  and  mid-day's  Prayers  of 

Your  beloved  Brother  in  the  Lord, 
3d  May,  1070.  j.  c. 

Directed  to  Mr.  D C gil,  Minister  of  the  Gospel  at  Glasgow. 

With  care  deliver  these. 

Edin.,  May  10th,  1070. 

Haec  est  vera  copia   epistola?   suprascriptse,   cujus   principalis  est  ad 
Ducem  Lauderdaliae  transmissa. 

Jo.  EDIXBURGEN,  &c. 
AND.  SODOREX. 
Aimi.  LISJIOREN. 


•JAMES  SHARP. 


We  U  ndcrsubscribcrs,  being  called  to  visit  the  Corps  of  the  late  Lord  Medical 
Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  do  find  that  he  had  received  a  wound  by  a  sword  c 
over  the  left  eye,  extending  two  inches  above  and  one  below,  making  a  great 
suffusion  of  blood  upon  the  check,  and  upper  and  lower  eyelid.  Next,  we 
found  many  wounds  upon  the  posterior  part  of  his  head,  insomuch  that  the 
whole  occipital  bone  was  shatter'd  all  in  pieces,  and  a  part  of  the  brain  lost 
thereby  upon  the  place,  which  certainly  being  so  great,  could  not  but  occa 
sion  his  present  death.  There  were  only  two  wounds  to  be  seen  upon  the 
body;  the  first,  two  or  three  inches  below  the  right  clavicle,  betwixt  the 
second  and  third  rib,  which  was  given  by  a  shot  not  reaching  the  capacity  of 
the  breast.  The  next  was  a  small  wound  upon  the  region  of  the  kidneys, 
given  by  a  small  sword.  Likewise  we  found  three  wounds  upon  his  left 
hand,  which  might  have  proved  mortal  tho  he  had  escaped  the  former.  Also 
another  upon  the  right  hand,  as  dangerous  as  the  former.  As  witness  our 
hands  at  St.  Andrews,  the  5th  day  of  May,  1070. 

(iKOIKiK    PlTILLO,   M.D. 

"WILLIAM  BORTIIWICK,  Chir. 
HKNRY  SPEXCK,  Chir. 
JAMKS  PIUXGLK,  Chir. 


CHARLES  R.  —  Right  trusty,  Ac.,  having  seen  and  considered  the  Proclama-  Proclamation 
tion  for  suppression  of  Field  Conventicles  which  in  your  Letter  of  the  1st  inst.  JjjjJjJ^jjJJ 
to  the  Duke  of  Lauderdalc,  you  sent  hither  for  our  perusal  and  approbation 
before  the  publication  thereof,  —  we  arc  so  well  pleased  with  it,  and  do  judge 
it  so  fit  for  that  purpose,  as  that  we  do  give  you  our  hearty  thanks  for  that 
good  effect  of  your  care  and  diligence  to  promote  our  service  and  preserve 
the  peace  of  that  our  ancient  Kingdom;  and  do  return  it  to  you  without  any 
delay,  to  the  end  that  no  time  may  be  lost  in  the  prosecution  of  so  good  a 
work.  Whereof  that  you  may  have  our  full  and  solemn  approbation,  we 
have  thought  fit  our  self  to  Sign  the  Draught  you  sent  up,  and  you  have  it 
here  inclosed.  And  as  we  are  fully  resolved  upon  all  occasions  to  assert 
and  maintain  our  authority,  and  to  put  the  Laws  in  execution  as  well  against 
those  who  by  private  and  underhand  dealings  endeavour  to  create  any  dis 
turbance  to'  our  Government  there,  cither  in  Church  or  State  (when  the 
same  shall  be  made  manifest  to  us),  as  against  those  who  of  late  have 
assumed  the  boldness  more  openly  to  attempt  the  raising  of  a  Rebellion 
there,  by  frequent  and  numerous  Convocations  in  Arms  at  Field  Conven 
ticles  —  these  nurseries  of  Rebellion,  and  many  other  irregular  and  illegal 
courses  ;  so  we  do  hereby  give  you  our  assurance,  that  you  shall  have  all 
due  countenance,  encouragement,  and  protection  from  us  in  the  discharge  of 
your  duties  in  our  service,  against  all  who  shall  traduce  or  asperse  any  of 
your  proceedings,  which  have  been  so  agreeable  to  law  and  reason,  as  wTe 
cannot  but  admire  the  impudence  (no  less  than  the  malice)  of  such  persons 
as  study  to  create  a  contrary  opinion  of  your  actions.  We  did  receive  such 
full  satisfaction  from  those  Lords  you  sent  up  last  year  to  inform  us  when 
there  was  some  noise  raised  (indeed  very  unjustly)  against  your  procedure, 


28 


ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 


as  we  do  now  think  lit  to  desire  that  some  of  your  number  may  repair  hither 
with  all  convenient  expedition,  to  the  end  we  may  not  only  receive  from  them 
a  full  account  of  the  state  of  our  affairs  there,  but  also  may  have  an  oppor 
tunity  to  signify  our  pleasure  in  many  things,  after  conference  with  them, 
which  at  present  we  cannot  impart  in  a  Letter.  And  because  the  Noblemen 
who  are  imploycd  in  our  service  are  either  of  our  Privy  Council  or  have 
Command  of  our  Forces,  or  both,  and  therefore  cannot  well  be  absent  at  this 
time,  we  have  thought  fit  rather  to  require  you  to  send  three  of  our  Officers 
of  State,  viz.,  our  Clerk-Register,  our  Advocate,  and  our  Justice-Clerk, 
together  with  the  President  of  our  College  of  Justice,  and  Sir  George  Mack 
enzie  of  Tilrbct,  our  Justice-General,  seeing  from  them  we  can  have  full 
information,  as  well  in  matters  of  Law  as  of  fact.  So  expecting  from  them 
a  ready  compliance  with  this  our  pleasure,  and  not  doubting  the  continuance 
of  your  care  and  diligence  in  all  tilings  that  concern  our  service  and  the 
peace  and  quiet  of  that  our  Kingdom,  we  hid  you  heartily  farewell.— Given 
at  our  Court  at  Whitehall  the  sixth  day  of  May,  1(57;),  and  of  our  Reign  the 
31st  year.  P>y  his  Majesty's  command. 

LAUDEKDALE. 


THE  LIFE  OF  THE  MOST  REVEREND  FATHER  IN  GOD, 
DR.  JAMES  SHARP, 

ARCHBISHOP  OF  ST.  ANDRKWS  AXJ)  PP.IMATX  OF  ALL  SCOTLAND. 

Parentage  and  Dr.  James  Sharp,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  was  great-grandchild  to 

Birthplace.  a  gentleman  in  Perthshire,  who  having  given  portions  to  his  numerous 
children,  one  of  his  sons,  named  David,  chose  to  go  to  live  in  the  Town  of 
Aberdeen,  where,  by  his  frugality  and  industry,  he  became  a  considerable 
merchant,  and  lived  and  Died  in  good  esteem.  By  his  wife,  Magdalen  Ilali- 
burton  (nearly  descended  of  the  Laird  of  Pitcur,  a  honourable  Family  in  the 
Shire  of  Angus),  he  had  a  son  named  William,  who  being  educated  at  the 
Schools  and  University  of  Aberdeen,  was,  for  his  extraordinary  natural 
parts  and  proficiency,  taken  notice  of  by  the  Marquess  of  lluntly,  and  other 
persons  of  quality  in  that  Country ;  but  particularly,  the  Earl  of  Findlator 
conceived  such  a  great  opinion  of  him,  that  he  took  him  to  his  house,  and 
committed  to  him  the  management  of  all  his  affairs.  This  Earl  had  Married 
a  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Rothes,  who  took  such  a  particular  concern  for 
Mr.  William  Sharp,  that  she  made  up  a  match  betwixt  him  and  Isabel  Lesly, 
daughter  to  the  Laird  of  Kiiiuiuvy,  a  gentleman  of  her  own  name  and  family. 
Not  long  after  this,  Mr.  Sharp  was  made  Sheriff-Clerk  of  Banffshire,  and 
liv'd  and  Died  in  the  Castle  of  Banff,  in  great  esteem  and  reputation  with 
all  who  knew  him.  His  wife,  Isabel  Lesly,  was  an  extraordinary  woman, 
honoured  by  all  for  her  wisdom  and  piety,  and  Died  of  a  great  age,  after  K. 
Charles  II. 's  Restoration. 

These  were  the  parents  of  James  Sharp,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
who  was  Born  in  the  Castle  of  Banff,  on  the  [4th]  of  May,  1618.     From  his 


JAMES  MIAUL'.  -2',} 

very  cradle  lie  was  look'd  upon  ah  a  child  that  promised  something  more 

than  ordinary,  and  therefore  was  by  them  cared  for  and  watched  over  with 

the  more  tender  concern.     Being  sent  to  school  sooner  than  is  usual  with  ^cut  to  School 

children  of  that  age,  he  outdid  all  his  fellows  in  the  very  rudiments  of  learn-  «t  Buutr. 

ing.    His  masterly  genius,  quick  apprehension,  and  tenacious  memory,  were 

early  signs  and  prognostic-Its  of  his  future  greatness.    AVithal,  he  was  observed 

to  be  a  diligent  Header  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  frequent  and  regular  in 

Meditation  and  Devotion  ;  and  he  had  great  satisfaction  to  be  in  company 

with  Clergymen,  which  made  his  father's  neighbours  call  him  in  jest  "  The 

young  Minister ;"  and  his  mother,  whose  darling  he  was,  was  frequently 

heard  to  say,  that  her  son  James  would  be  a  Bishop.     And  she  had  the 

satisfaction  to  hear  of  his  promotion  before  her  Death. 

These  considerations  mov'd  his  father  to  dedicate  him  to  Christ  and  the 
services  of  his  Church,  who,  to  compleat  his  education,  sent  him  to  the 
University  of  Aberdeen,  where  he  arrived  to  such  perfection  in  the  Philo 
sophy  then  in  vogue,  that  he  was  the  envy  of  his  condisciplcs  and  admiration 
of  the  Masters. 

Having  past  his  courses  in  the  College  with  great  applause,  and  being  Educated  at 
made  Master  of  Arts,  he  apply'd  himself  to  the  study  of  Theology,  in  which  Abc: 
he  us'd  the  advice  and  directions  of  these  miracles  of  learning,  Doctor  Forbes 
and  Dr.  Baron,  the  last  of  whom  commonly  call'd  him  after  a  familiar  way, 
Mi  Jncnbc  Sl/iirji,  Slt«r}>,  signifying  the  opinion  he  had  of  his  conception  and 
readiness.     Under  these  great  tutors  in  that  sacred  science,  his  advances 
were  extraordinary  ;  and  there  he  suck'd  in  a  set  of  such  Orthodox,  and 
Catholick  Principles,  as  were  more  agreeable  to  his  after  elevated  character 
and  the  last  scenes  of  Ins  life,  than  adapted  to  these  tragical  times  in  which 
he  was  to  make  his  first  figure  and  entrance  into  the  world. 

The  Doctors  of  Aberdeen,  of  whom  the  before -nam'd  Forbes  and  Baron 
were  two,  eminently  appearing  against  the  Covenant  (that  forerunner  of 
many  woes),  incensed  the  Balaams  of  those  times  to  that  degree,  that  not 
only  these  reverend  persons,  but  also  their  friends  and  familiars,  and  those 
suspected  to  be  of  their  principles,  were  preach'd  down,  whisper'd  off,  pointed 
at,  and  mobb'd,  against  all  Laws,  out  of  the  protection  of  Law,  their  inter 
ests,  and  the  natural  privilcdgcs  of  subjects.  Young  Mr.  Sharp  finding  the 
clouds  of  Sedition,  Schism,  Faction,  and  Picbcllion  to  break  out  upon  Church 
and  State,  and  being  known  to  be  no  favourer  of  these  tumultuous  practices, 
resolved  to  retire  for  some  short  time  to  England,  hoping  such  violent  storms 
could  not  be  lasting ;  with  a  purpose  to  return,  and  do  all  the  good  services 
to  his  Country  that  his  inclinations  and  abilities  fitted  him  for,  when  the 
tempest  was  over. 

During  his  stay  in  that  Kingdom,  he  contracted  an  acquaintance  with  Visited  Oxford 
several  eminent  and  learii'd  Divines,  particularly  with  those  great  lights,  brid 
Dr.   Sanderson,  Dr.  Hammond,  and  Dr.  Taylor ;  and  visited  the  famous 
Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge.     And  thu  then  was  the  critical  time 


80  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

when  Scotsmen,  particularly  young  men  of  that  Nation,  were  suspected  l,y 
the  Church  of  England,  yet  he  stood  fair  for  considerable  Ecclesiastical 
Benefices,  and  had  the  honour  to  be  taken  notice  of,  and  in  favour  with 
several  persons  of  note,  who,  as  we  may  reasonably  suppose,  would  have 
prcferr'd  him.  But  then  no  less  confusions  thrcatning  England  than  what 
had  really  happeii'd  in  Scotland,  made  him  unresolved  to  settle  there.  And 
bchi"  also  sci/'d  with  a  violent  ague,  which  was  like  to  have  prov'd  danger 
ous,  both  by  advice  and' inclination  he  returned  to  his  native  Country,  after 
some  years'  absence,  tho  with  improved  parts,  yet  in  a  bad  state  of  health. 
Stay  at  But  Providence  never  fails  to  take  care  of  its  own  eminent  instruments, 

Haddington.  foii  iu  his  jounioy  to  Edinburgh  he  happcn'd  to  lodge  at  Haddington  in  the 
same  inn  with  Sir  James  McGill  of  Cranston,  afterwards  Viscount  of  Oxen- 
ford,  a  person  of  a  noble  and  generous  temper,  and  who  (in  imitation  of  his 
worthy  ancestors)  was  remarkable  for  learning,  loyalty,  and  services  to  the 
publick.  He,  after  a  short  conversation  with  Mr.  Sharp,  conceived  such  an 
opinion  of  him,  that  he  carried  him  along  to  his  house  in  the  country,  where 
he  recovered  his  health,  and  was  treated  with  much  respect,  friendship,  and 
familiarity,  of  which  he  always  retained  a  grateful  sense  through  the  whole 
course  of  his  life. 

During  his  stay  here,  he  was  known  to  several  of  the  Nobility  and 
Gentry,  particularly  to  the  Earl  of  Rothcs,  who  patronix'd  him,  not  only  on 
the  account  of  his  parts,  but  also  on  the  recommendations  of  some  gentle 
men  of  the  name  of  Lcsly,  of  his  Lordship's  Family,  and  Mr.  Sharp's  rela- 
Profcssor  in      tions ;  and  partly  by  his  interest,  but  more  for  his  own  merits,  he  was  chosen 
St.  Leonards.    one  Of  ^1C  Professors  of  Philosophy  iii  St.  Leonard's  College  in  St.  Andrews, 
which  was  the  first  step  of  his  advancement. 

In  this  capacity  he  mcasur'd  his  time  with  great  frugality,  allotting 
such  portions  of  it  for  the  instruction  of  his  scholars  as  were  necessary,  and 
employing  the  rest  for  his  own  improvement,  without  neglecting  to  converse 
with  the  world.  He  kept  a  very  good  understanding  with  the  Masters  of  the 
University,  only  there  happened  a  scuflle  betwixt  Mr.  Sinclair,  a  fellow- 
Regent  with  himself  in  St.  Leonard's  College,  which  was  like  to  have  cost 
him  dear.  This  Mr.  Sinclair  was  a  ringleader  and  champion  for  the  Cove 
nant,  and  afterwards  Preacher  at  Ormestou.  One  day  after  dinner,  at  the 
common  table  of  the  College,  when  the  Students  were  remov'd,  a  Debate 
arose  on  the  subject  of  Church  Government  betwixt  them;  in  which  Mr. 
Sharp,  venting  and  maintaining  Hooker's,  Hall's,  and  Hammond's  principles 
with  a  philosophical  liberty,  confounded  and  irritated  his  antagonist  to  that 
decree  that  he  exceeded  the  bounds  of  common  decency,  and  gave  him  flatly 

Sinclair  s  box         &  .  ml  ,, 

on  the  ear.  the  lie,  which  Mr.  Sharp  return  d  with  a  box  on  the  ear.  The  account  of 
this  was  iiois'd  about,  and  for  some  time  gave  a  very  bad  impression  of  him 
to  several  Churchmen ;  notwithstanding  which,  that  humour  dwindled  away 
by  degrees,  and  his  abilities  rais'd  his  reputation,  and  usher'd  him  into  the 
familiarity  of  many  great  men,  particularly  of  John,  Earl  of  Crawford-Lind- 


JAMES  SHAEP.  81 

say,  who,  tho  too  much  in  the  wrong  faction  of  these  times,  yet  inherited 
many  of  the  excellent  vertues  of  his  noble  race. 

By  this  Lord's  means  he  quitted  the  post  of  a  Master  of  Philosophy  in  Minister  of 
the  College,  and  embrac'd  the  oilice  of  a  Preacher  in  the  Town  of  Carail,  ^r:ul- 
and  there  in  a  singular  manner  exemplified  the  Evangelical  precept  as  to 
the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  and  innocence  of  the  dove.     Here  his  labours 
were  most  acceptable,  and  gain'd  on  the  hearts  of  the  people  by  calmness, 
condescension,  and  affability.     He  acquitted  himself  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  most  part  of  his  fellow-Preachers  ;   only  Mr.  P>lair,  and  some  of  the 
moroser  sort,  us'd  to  say  they  did  not  believe  him  sound  (a  word  then,  and 
since,  of  a  weighty  import),  and  that  he  spoke  through  a  Bishop. 

In  that  remarkable  division  of  the  Presbyterians  info  Publick  liesolu-  Tho  two 
tioners  and  Picmonstrators,  he  joyn'd  the  former,  as  being  the  only  men  of  p 
the  whole  who  were  of  the  greatest  moderation,  Religion,  loyalty,  and  sin 
cerity.  This  untimely  breach  occasioned  many  miscarriages,  intestine  broils, 
and  defeats  at  Dunbar  and  Worcester,  and  in  the  issue  prov'd  the  overthrow 
of  Presbytery.  Notwithstanding  these  sad  times,  when  the  Royal  Family 
was  under  the  cloud,  yet  Mr.  Sharp  had  the  honour  and  courage  to  corres 
pond  with  the  King  in  his  exile,  and  spared  no  pains  to  keep  life  in  the 
fainting  spirit  of  loyalty  in  many  of  the  brethren,  of  which  his  Majesty  was 
not  unmindful  on  the  Restoration. 

This  rupture  still  increasing,  involved  not  only  the  Churchmen  but  the 
whole  Nation  in  flames.  Both  parties  hop'd  for  favour  from  Oliver,  Lord 
Protector,  and  appointed  their  agents  to  repair  to  him. 

The  Publick  Resolutioners  unanimously  chose  Mr.  Sharp,  whom  they 
knew  to  be  of  a  strong  head,  quick  wit,  and  of  a  very  equal  temper.  The 
Picmonstrators  sent  up  Mr.  Guthry,  Preacher  at  Stirling,  the  very  image  and 
compcnd  of  the  whole  party.  He  represented  a  hot-headed  incendiary  and 
an  impudent  rebel,  who  with  his  slanderous  tongue  prophan'd  the  Pulpit, 
and  at  Stirling  treated  King  Charles  to  his  face  as  the  Old  Testament  varlet 
Shimci  did  good  King  David  at  Bahurim,  in  the  days  of  his  distress. 

The  Protector  having  appointed  the  day,  hour,  and  place  for  hearing  the  Guthry  of 
two  Commissioners  on  their  differences,  Mr.  Guthry  spoke  first,  and  so  long,  '  ' 
that  when  he  had  ended,  the  Protector  look'd  upon  his  watch,  and  told  Mr. 
Sharp  he  would  hear  him  at  another  time,  for  his  hour  for  other  dispatches 
was  approaching.  Put  Mr.  Sharp  beg'd  to  be  heard,  promising  to  be  very 
short.  His  request  being  seconded  by  his  intimate  friend  the  Lord  Broghill, 
afterwards  the  famous  Earl  of  Orrery,  Oliver  was  prevail'd  upon  to  give  him 
an  audience.  And  then  in  a  few  words  he  turn'd  Mr.  Guthry's  arguments 
against  himself  and  the  cause  he  defended,  and  gave  such  a  rational  repre 
sentation  of  his  constituents  and  their  party,  that  Oliver  Avas  not  only 
satisfied  they  had  justice  on  their  side,  but  also  so  much  taken  with  Mr. 
Sharp's  genteel  management  and  address,  that  he  told  the  bystanders  that 
that  gentleman,  after  the  Scotch  way,  ought  to  be  stiled  "  Sharp  of  that  Ilk." 


82  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

And  it  is  not  to  bo  thought  that  a  man  of  Oliver's  reach  and  Politicks,  when 
he  had  nipt  the  growth  of  the  Levellers  and  Fifth  Monarchists,  would  have 
encouraged  men  of  such  factious  spirits  and  disteinpcr'd  brains  as  the 
Remonstrators  of  Scotland  were. 

And  good  it  was  for  the  Nation  that  affairs  were  thus  ordcr'd ;  for  if 
these  had  prevail'd,  the  Pulpits  would  have  made  work  for  the  scaffold  and 
gibbet,  and  Mr.  Sharp  most  probably  would  have  been  the  first  sacrifice  ; 
which  made  him  own  on  all  occasions  that  he  ow'd  his  life  to  Oliver  Crom 
well,  and  was  seldom  heard  to  mention  him  but  he  acknowledged  his  personal 
merit  and  his  own  obligation. 

Sharp's  atten-  Mr.  Sharp's  character  and  conduct  ill  this  affair  is  represented  to  Mr. 

Commission,     Bowglas  and  Mr.  Dickson,  &c.,  from  Mr.  Calamy  and  Mr.  Ashe.  in  a  Letter 
Dated  at  London,  December,  1G57,  and  expressed  thus  : — 


Onr  Reverend  Brother  Mr.  Sharp  hath  with  much  prudence,  courage, 
and  laboriousiiess  unwearicdly  attended  and  managed  t'  e  trust  committed 
to  him ;  yea,  as  we  believe,  he  hath  secured  your  cause  from  sundry  asper 
sions  which  otherwise  might  probably  have  reproach'd  it,  and  he  hath  gain'd 
respect  in  the  opinions  of  some  in  highest  place  by  his  wisdom  and  meekness 
in  vindicating  it  from  misrepresentations.  And  although  the  great  concern 
ment  (which  he  hath  faithfully  and  zealously  minded)  be  not  brought  to  so 
good  a  conclusion  as  was  desir'd  and  pray'd  for,  yet  we  sec  cause  to  bless 
God  for  that  which  is  done,  hoping  that  through  your  prudent  improvement 
thereof  it  will  tend  to  future  advantage. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  from  this  time  we  may  state  the  rage  of  the  vio 
lent  party  (for  I  do  not  mean  to  charge  the  moderate  Presbyterians)  which 
fell  heavy  on  this  excellent  person,  and  never  left  persecuting  him  till  he 
was  an  approv'd  Confessor  and  crown'd  a  Martyr. 

Ketum  home.  Having  succeeded  in  this  important  affair,  he  returned  to  Scotland  to 

the  exercise  of  his  Station,  and  always  kept  a  good  understanding  with  Mr. 
David  Dickson,  Mr.  George  Hutcheson,  and  the  most  eminent  for  worth  and 
learning  of  the  gang ;  but  these  he  was  most  inward  with  were  Mr.  James 
Wood,  a  learned,  honest,  and  open-hearted  man,  and  Mr.  Robert  Dowglas, 
who  had  abilities  and  experience  that  ermally  fitted  him  for  the  highest 
character  in  the  Church,  the  State,  or  the  Camp. 

His  reputation  growing  with  his  worth,  rais'd  a  general  esteem  of  him, 
and  gave  him  access  to  an  acrjiiaiiitance  with  General  Monk,  who  look'd 
upon  him  as  a  man  of  probity  and  reach,  and  always  after  treated  him  with 
singular  familiarity,  and  employed  him  accordingly. 

Cromwell's  Cromwel  Dying  on  September  3d,  1058,  distractions  increased,  and  his 

son  Richard  being  turned  out  by  the  Rump  Parliament  (which  in  the  month 
of  May  the  next  year  was  again  restored),  factions  and  divisions  so  prevailed 
that  General  Monk  had  thereby  a  plausible  pretence  of  returning  to  England, 
which  he  did,  marching  from  Caldstream  upon  Tweed  the  first  day  of  January, 
in  anno  16GO,  and  entred  London  with  his  Army  3d  February.  The  troitbled 


JAMES  SHARP.  83 

state  of  affairs  dispos'd  each  party  to  make  court  to  him,  as  they  were  differ 
ently  affected,  and  not  only  to  seek  after  present  protection,  but  also  for 
future  security. 

Some  of  the  chief  Presbyterian  Brethren  in  Scotland  made  choise  of  Chosen  repre- 
Mr.  Sharp,  and  commissioned  him  to  be  their  Agent  in  the  cause  and  affairs  th^Kirk  °f 
of  the  Kirk  with  General  Monk.     After  his  arrival  at  London,  he  address'd 
his  Excellency,  and  was  graciously  received,  as  "being  dear  to  him  on  many 
accounts,  and  his  very  good  friend,"  as  the  General  expresseth  himself  in 
his  Letter,  Dated  at  Drapers'  Hall,  London,  IGth  February,  1GGO,  directed 
to  Mr.  David  Dickson,  Mr.  Piobcrt  Douglas,  Mr.  George  Hutcheson,  and  Mr. 
James  Wood;  which  he  thus  concludes,  that  they  may  "rest  assured  that 
none  shall  be  more  careful  to  preserve  their  profession  hi  honour  than  he." 

But  it  was  not  only  to  the  General  that  he  made  application,  but  to 
others  also  of  the  best  quality,  who  were  friends  to  the  interest  in  which  he 
was  then  engaged ;  as  appears  by  a  Letter  from  the  Earls  of  Crawford  and 
Lawderdale,  and  the  Lord  Sinclair,  in  answer  to  one  from  the  above-men 
tioned  Brethren,  Dated  20th  March,  in  which  they  represent  Mr.  Sharp  a 
faithful,  diligent,  and  useful  person. 

All  things  ripening  for  the  wonderful  Piestoration,  General  Monk  sent  Sent  to  the 
Mr.  Sharp  over  to  Holland,  about  the  beginning  of  May,  1GGO,  to  give  an  £2.°* 
account  to  the  King  of  his  Excellency's  behaviour  and  proceedings,  from  the 
beginning  in  Scotland  to  the  progress  he  had  made  at  the  time  of  the  Par 
liament's  owning  his  Majesty's  Title,  &c.  He  having  arrived  at  the  Court 
of  Breda,  had  several  Conferences  with  the  King,  as  is  evident  by  his  own 
Letter  to  Mr.  Robert  Douglas,  20th  May,  1GGO.  And  tho  his  Commission 
at  first  was  but  from  a  small  number,  and  to  General  Monk  only,  yet  he 
took  the  advantage  of  the  time,  and  address'd  his  Majesty  in  name  of  the 
body  of  the  Ministry  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  which  had  persever'd  in  her 
integrity  and  loyalty  in  all  Revolutions.  This  was  seemingly  very  kindly 
accepted  by  his  Majesty;  who  returning  to  England,  Mr.  Sharp  came  along, 
and  there  left  no  stone  unturned  in  the  faithful  discharge  of  his  trust ;  and 
by  a  constant  Correspondence  with  Mr.  Robert  Douglas,  gave  him  an  account 
of  all  the  great  emergencies  and  resolutions  of  the  Court,  with  all  the  steps 
of  his  own  conduct.  The  result  of  which  was  at  length  (but  with  much 
importunity,  difficulty,  and  recommendation)  a  Letter  from  the  King,  10th 
August,  which  I  have  taken  from  the  Original,  directed  thus,  "To  our  trusty 
and  well  beloved  Mr.  Robert  Douglas,  Minister  of  the  Gospel  in  our  City  of 
Edinburgh,  to  be  communicated  to  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,"  and  is  as 
follows : — 

CHARLES  R,— Trusty  and  well  beloved,  we  greet  you  well.    By  the  Letter  Letter  from 
you  sent  to  us  with  the  Bearer,  Mr.  James  Sharp,  and  by  the  account  he  gave  tlie 
of  the  state  of  our  Church  there,  we  have  received  full  information  of  your 
sense  of  our  sufferings,  and  of  your  constant  affection  and  loyalty  to  our 
person  and  authority.     And  therefore  we  will  detain  him  here  no  longer  (of 

VOL.  II.  B 


34  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

whose  good  service  we  are  very  sensible),  nor  will  we  delay  to  let  you  know 
by  him  our  gracious  acceptance  of  your  Address,  and  how  we  are  satisfied 
with  your  carriages,  and  with  the  generality  of  the  Ministers  of  Scotland,  in 
this  time  of  tryal,  whilst  some  under  specious  pretences  swcrv'd  from  that 
duty  and  allegiance  they  ow'd  to  us.  And  because  such,  who  by  the  coun 
tenance  of  usurpers  have  disturbed  the  peace  of  that  our  Church,  may  also 
labour  to  create  jealousies  in  the  minds  of  well  meaning  people,  we  have 
thought  lit  by  this  to  assure  you.  that,  by  the  grace  of  Clod,  we  resolve  to 
discountenance  prophanity  and  all  contemners  and  opposers  of  the  Ordin 
ances  of  the  Gospel.  We  do  also  resolve  to  protect  and  preserve  the  Govern 
ment  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  as  it  is  settled  by  Law,  without  violation  ; 
and  to  countenance  in  the  due  exercise  of  their  functions  all  such  Ministers 
Avho  shall  behave  themselves  dutifully  and  peaceably,  as  becomes  men  of 
their  calling.  We  will  also  take  care  that  the  Authority  and  Acts  of  the 
General  Assembly  at  St.  Andrews  and  Dundee,  the  year  1051,  be  own'd  and 
stand  iu  force  until  we  shall  call  another  General  Assembly,  which  we  pur 
pose  to  do  as  soon  as  our  affairs  will  permit ;  and  we  do  intend  to  send  for 
Mr.  Robert  Douglas  and  some  other  Ministers,  that  we  may  speak  with  them 
in  what  may  further  concern  the  affairs  of  that  Church.  And  as  we  are 
very  well  satisfied  with  your  resolution  not  to  meddle  without  your  sphere, 
so  we  do  expect  that  Church  Judicatorics  in  Scotland  and  Ministers  there 
will  keep  within  the  compass  of  their  station,  meddling  only  with  matters 
Ecclesiastick,  and  promoting  our  authority  and  interest  with  our  subjects 
against  all  opposers  ;  and  that  they  will  take  special  notice  of  all  such  who, 
by  Preaching  and  Private  Conventicles,  or  any  other  way,  transgress  the 
limits  of  their  calling,  by  endeavouring  to  corrupt  the  people,  or  sow  seeds 
of  disaffection  to  us  or  our  Government.  This  you  shall  make  known  to  the 
several  Presbyteries  within  that  our  Kingdom.  And  as  we  do  give  assurance 
of  our  favour  and  encouragement  to  you,  and  to  all  honest  deserving  Minis 
ters  there,  so  we  earnestly  recommend  it  to  you  all,  that  you  be  earnest  in 
your  Prayers,  publick  and  private,  to  Almighty  God,  who  is  our  Rock  and 
our  Deliverer,  botli  for  us  and  for  our  Government,  that  we  may  have  fresh 
and  constant  supplies  of  His  grace,  and  the  right  improvement  of  all  His 
mercies  and  deliverances,  to  the  honour  of  His  great  name,  and  the  peace, 
safety,  and  benefit  of  all  our  Kingdoms.  And  so  we  bid  you  heartily  fare 
well. — Given  at  our  Court  at  Whitehall  the  10th  of  August,  1000,  and  of 
our  Reign  the  twelfth  year. 

By  his  Majesty's  command. 

LAUDERDALE. 

And  of  the  above  Date  also,  Mr.  Calamy,  Mr.  Ashe,  and  Mr.  Manton 
wrote  another  Letter  upon  the  affair  in  hand,  directed  thus  :  "To  our  rever 
end  and  highly  esteem'd  Brethren  Mr.  David  Dickson,  Mr.  Robert  Douglas, 
Mr.  James  Hamilton,  Mr.  John  Smith,  and  Mr.  George  Hutcheson,  these 
present,  Edinburgh  ;"  in  which  they  shew  the  great  joy  and  satisfaction  they 
had  in  the  security  of  the  established  Government  of  the  Church  of  Scotland, 
and  of  their  own  bad  circumstances  iu  England,  and  of  their  willingness  to 
submit  to  a  Moderate  and  Synodical  Episcopacy,  providing  they  were  not 
tied  up  to  higher  terms  and  conditions. 

Mr.  Sharp  being  now  to  leave  London,  the  King  at  his  parting  express'd 


JAMES  SHARP.  35 

such  an  opinion  of  his  abilities,  that  he  gave  him  a  mark  of  his  Royal  favour,  The  King  Ten- 
ami  made  him  his  Chaplain  for  Scotland,  with  a  Pension  of  200  Lib.  Sterling  sions  shari'- 
per  annum,  which  he  cnjoy'd  to  the  time  of  his  execrable  Murder. 

Having  made  a  quick  journey  to  Edinburgh,  he  delivered  up  his  Com 
mission  (the  ends  of  which  he  had  faithfully  pursued),  and  the  full  Answer 
to  it,  to  his  Constituents,  and  after  this  had  never  another  from  the  party, 
or  was  imploy'd  by  them;  which  shews  that  it  is  a  gross  calumny,  and  load 
ing  his  memory  unjustly,  to  affirm  that  he  betray'd  them,  seeing  he  was 
under  no  trust. 

During  his  absence,  he  was  chosen  Professor  of  Divinity  in  St.  Mary's  Professor  of 
College  in  St.  Andrews.  "Whether  he  ever  cxercis'd  that  Office,  I  am  not 
certain  ;  if  he  did,  it  must  have  been  for  a  short  time  ;  for  on  the  first  day 
of  January  following,  anno  1001,  the  Parliament  sat  down  at  Edinburgh, 
the  Earl  of  Middleton  being  his  Majesty's  High  Commissioner ;  and  on 
February  an  Act  was  made  for  the  Visitation  of  the  College  of  Aberdeen. 
The  Management  of  its  Revenue  was  to  be  inquir'd  into  from  1038,  and  its 
present  state  represented.  Commissioners  were  appointed  for  that  effect, 
one  of  whom  was  Mr.  Sharp,  who  had  the  honour  to  act  in  conjunction  with 
the  greatest  and  best  of  the  Nation. 

In  this  Parliament,  if  the  causes  of  the  late  troubles  were  not  fully 
inquired  into,  yet  their  extravagant  effects  were  disproved,  and  Laws  and 
Acts  made  for  preventing  the  like  attempts  and  dismal  calamities  ;  and  at 
one  stroak,  an  Act  past  on  the  28th  March,  rescinding  and  annulling  the 
pretended  Parliaments  in  the  years  10  iO  and  10 11,  &c.,  by  which  the  ancient 
prerogative  of  the  Crown  was  restored,  and  sovereignty  freed  from  the  inva 
sions  of  late  times  ;  so  that  by  this  the  Government  of  the  State,  and  in 
effect  that  of  the  Church,  was  put  in  the  same  legal  condition  that  they  were 
in  before  the  troubles  began. 

This  the  Parliament  thought  their  duty,  and  their  measures  were  most 
agreeable  to  the  body  of  the  better  sort  of  the  Nation.  Nay,  the  Brethren 
themselves  became  so  sensible  of  their  miscarriages,  that  of  three  parts,  two 
of  them  had  a  tendency  to  Episcopacy,  and  many  took  their  own  ways  to 
discover  and  own  it,  and  some  of  these  after  a  more  open  manner,  particu 
larly  the  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  whose  Address,  I  presume,  may  be  properly 
enough  inserted  in  this  place. 

To  his  Grace,  his  Majesty's  High  Commissioner,  and  the  Hi;/h  Court  of 

Parliament. 

The  humble  Address  of  the  Synod  of  Aberdeen. 

The  various  dispensations  wherewith  the  righteous  and  wise  Lord  of  Address  of  the 
Heaven  and  Earth  hath  been  exercising  us  these  many  years  bygone,  cries  Synod  of 
aloud  to  all  the  subjects  in  Scotland  who  have  not  laid  aside  all  sense  of  sin  Aberdeen- 
and  duty,  to  reflect  seriously  upon  the  publick  transactions  of  this  Church 
and  Nation,  especially  upon  the  deportment  thereof  to  the  King  and  the 


36  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Royal  Authority.  And  while  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  fix  such  thoughts  upon 
our  spirits,  wo  cannot,  unless  we  would  blindfold  our  own  consciences,  stop 
the  mouth  thereof,  hide  our  sin  in  our  bosom  with  Adam,  and  keep  fast 
deceit  under  our  tongue,  but  give  glory  to  God  in  an  humble  and  ingenuous 
confession,  as  of  the  national  guiltiness  of  Scotland,  so  of  our  own  iniquity, 
in  so  far  as  we  have  been  any  way  accessory  to  these  sinful  and  rebellious 
affronts  and  wrongs  which  have  been  put  upon  Royal  Authority,  whether 
during  the  Reign  of  our  late  most  gracious  Soveraign,  that  blessed  Martyr, 
Charles  I.,  or  since  his  horrid  Murder,  to  our  gracious  King,  who  now,  in 
the  Lord's  most  wonderful  and  gracious  Providence,  Reigns  over  us.  And 
particularly  we  acknowledge  these  sad  and  grievous  sins  to  be  lying  on  the 
land,  and  upon  us,  according  to  the  several  degrees  and  measures  of  our 
accession,  Avhcthcr  driven  thereto  by  force  and  violence  of  a  prevailing  party, 
through  humane  weakness  in  that  hour  of  temptation,  or  by  sinful  silence, 
and  want  of  courage  to  have  pleaded  against  such  courses,  viz.,  the  rising 
in  arms  against  the  King,  the  preaching  up  the  lawfulness  of  defensive  arms 
by  subjects  against  the  Supreme  Magistrate,  which  is  contrary  to  Scripture, 
to  all  sound  Antiquity,  to  the  constant  practice  of  the  ancient  Primitive 
Church,  to  the  judgement  of  all  sound  Orthodox  Divines,  contrary  to  oiir 
National  Confession  of  Faith  and  to  the  Oath  of  Allegiance  :  Popular  Refor 
mation  without,  much  more  against,  the  King's  special  consent  and  author 
ity :  The  assisting  the  King's  enemies  byjoyning  our  Forces  with  them, 
while  as  they  were  in  Rebellion  against  their  Soveraigu  Lord  and  Master  : 
The  preaching  down  the  King's  cause  and  interest,  and  preaching  up  the 
interest  of  his  enemies:  The  giving  out  a  Paper  called  "  A  Seasonable 
Warning  for  delivering  up  the  King  at  Newcastle  ;"  and  that  without  any 
assurances,  either  by  writ  or  pledges,  for  his  Majesty's  security,  safety, 
honour,  and  freedom ;  altho  there  was  no  sufficient  hostage  in  that  land  to 
have  been  given  for  his  sacred  person  :  The  preaching  against  the  intended 
relief  of  his  Majesty,  of  precious  memory,  when  he  was  a  suffering  prisoner 
in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  anno  10-18,  where  he  was  detained  till  at  last  these 
usurpers  brought  him  to  that  fatal  block :  The  putting  unjust  limitations 
and  restrictions  upon  our  gracious  King,  Avho  now  Reigns  over  us  by  God's 
blessing  (in  despight  of  all  open  and  vailed  enemies,  who  of  late  have  put  on 
the  Robe  of  Loyalty),  before  he  was  admitted  to  the  exercise  of  his  Royal 
power :  The  indignities  which  were  put  upon  his  sacred  Majesty  by  a  factious 
and  treacherous  party,  in  that  infamous  and  treasonable  remonstrance : 
The  opposing  of  the  publick  Resolutions,  both  of  King,  Church,  and  State, 
by  that  party,  for  the  just  and  necessary  defence  of  King,  Religion,  Honour, 
and  all  which  was  dear  to  men  or  Christians,  the  land  being  invaded,  and 
one  half  thereof  being  possess'd  by  an  Army  of  Sectaries,  who  by  force  and 
fraud  had  inslaved  their  own  native  Country,  that  ancient  and  famous  King 
dom  of  England.  And  altho  these  sins  of  the  remonstrance,  opposing  of, 
and  protesting  against  the  public  Resolutions,  be  not  a  national  guiltiness, 
both  the  one  and  the  other  being  testified  against  and  condemned  by  the 
generality  of  the  State,  Church,  and  Country;  yet  these  being  the  guiltiness 
of  a  party  in  the  Nation,  we  could  not  admit  them,  as  matters  of  just  pro 
vocation  against  God  Almighty  :  The  excluding  of  the  King's  interest  out  of 
the  state  of  the  quarrel  betwixt  his  Majesty's  own  Army  and  that  usurper 
and  tyrant  Oliver  Cromwel,  by  that  infamous  Act  of  the  West  Kirk :  The 
forcing  of  the  King's  Majesty,  being  then  in  their  power,  rather  as  a  noble 


JAMES  SHARP.  37 

prisoner  than  a,  free  King,  sore  against  his  Royal  will,  to  Subscribe  Declara 
tions  against  himself  and  his  Royal  Family :  The  little  sympathy  with  his 
Majesty  in  his  sufferings  abroad  :  The  sinful  neglect  of  duty,  for  fear  of  men, 
in  not  Praying  for  him  in  publick ;  sinful  silence  in  not  preaching  absolutely 
against  the  usurpers  ;  too  much  at  least  passive  complyancc  with  them, 
sitting  down  like  Issachar  under  the  burden,  and  being  like  Ephraim,  a  silly 
dove  without  a  heart.  For  these,  and  sins  of  the  like  nature,  done  against 
the  Royal  Authority,  God  in  His  justice  and  wisdom  brought  and  kept  us 
under  a  sad  captivity  and  bondage.  And  have  not  all  the  land,  and  we, 
according  unto  the  measure  of  our  accession,  more  nor  reason  to  confess 
guiltiness  before  God,  men,  and  angels,  and  to  intreat  earnestly  for  mercy, 
therefore,  at  the  Throne  of  Grace  '?  And  now,  since  it  hath  pleased  the 
Eternal  God,  by  Whom  Kings  Reign,  to  bring  back  our  native  King,  and  to 
settle  him  upon  his  Royal  Ancestors'  Throne,  for  which  we  shall  desire  to 
bless  the  Lord  while  we  live  ;  we  conceive  that,  upon  this  signal  mercy, 
God  calls  us  to  engage,  likeas  hereby  we  do  in  the  strength  of  God  engage, 
ourselves  never  to  be  accessory  to  any  disloyal  principle  or  practice,  but 
declare  our  utter  abhorrence  thereof,  and  of  every  thing  that  may  have  any 
tendency  that  way;  obliging  not  only  ourselves  to  subjection,  obedience,  and 
submission  to  the  Royal  Authority  and  Commands,  but  also  to  Preach  loy 
alty,  subjection,  obedience,  and  submission,  and  to  press  the  same  from  the 
Word  of  God,  and,  according  thereto,  upon  all  his  Majesty's  subjects  under 
our  Ministry ;  and  that  it  is  sinful  and  ungodly  for  subjects  to  resist  the 
King's  Authority;  but  that  in  case  of  dissatisfaction  in  any  command  by  his 
Majesty,  it  is  their  duty  to  suffer.  And  because  it  hath  pleased  the  King's 
Majesty  and  his  High  Court  of  Parliament,  for  the  over-reaching  of  many 
Ministers  in  Scotland,  their  outstretching  of  Prcsbyterial  Government,  by 
making  it  run  in  an  excentick  line,  in  naedling  with  Civil  concernments,  and 
topping  with  the  Supreme  Authority,  and  upon  other  grave  considerations, 
known  themselves,  which  becomes  us  not  to  search  into  ;  to  take  away  and 
rescind  the  Laws  and  Acts  of  Parliament  whereby  the  Government  of  this 
Church  had  any  Civil  Authority :  that  it  would  please  the  King's  Commis 
sioner's  Grace  and  the  High  Court  of  Parliament  to  joyn  with  iis  in  this  our 
earnest  Petition,  and  to  transmit  the  same  to  his  sacred  Majesty,  that  he 
will  allow  us  to  be  still  under  his  Majesty's  protection,  and  that  he  may  be 
pleased  in  his  wisdom  and  goodness  to  settle  the  Government  of  this  rent 
Church  according  to  the  Word  of  God,  the  practice  of  the  ancient  Primitive 
Church,  in  such  a  way  as  may  be  most  consistent  with  Royal  Authority, 
may  conduce  most  for  godliness,  for  i;nity,  peace,  and  order;  for  a  learned, 
godly,  peaceable,  and  loyal  Ministry,  and  most  apt  to  preserve  the  peace  of 
the  three  Nations.  For  doing  whereof,  we  shall  be  earnest  to  supplicate 
God  in  his  Majesty's  behalf,  for  wisdom,  counsel,  and  direction.  We  have 
conceived  this  emission  to  be  a  duty  lying  upon  us,  in  reference  to  God,  to 
the  King,  to  this  Church  and  Land,  and  for  the  exoneration  of  our  own 
consciences  before  the  world.  And  altho  this  has  been  our  principal  motive, 
yet  it  hath  been  no  small  encouragement  to  this  Synod,  that  we  have  been 
put  in  remembrance  by  that  noble  and  worthy  Lord,  the  Earl  Marshal,  in 
his  Letter  to  the  Assembly,  to  this  effect ;  and  for  which  the  Synod  renders 
his  Lordship  hearty  thanks,  considering  that  he,  having  so  great  influence 
in  this  corner  of  the  land,  may  be  very  instrumental  for  advancing  Religion, 
justice,  and  loyalty  here.  And  tin's  Paper  we  have  ordained  to  be  Registred 


33  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

in  our  Synod  Books,  c«l  fntnrani  rcl  nioiioi-lnni.  And  in  testimony  of  our 
unanimity  licrcin,  \vc  have  all  Subscribed  it  Avith  our  Lands,  at  the  King's 
College  at  Aberdeen,  the  18th  of  April,  1GG1  years. 

Mr.  Ar.r.x.  Ross,  Minister  of  Monimitsk,  and  Moderator. 

Mr.  JOHN  PATERSOX,  Minister  at  Aberdeen. 

Mr.  JOHN  MEINZIES,  Professor  of  Divinity,  and  Minister  at  Aberdeen. 

Mr.  GEORGE  MEI.DRUM.  Minister  at  Aberdeen. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  DOLT; LAS,  Professor  of  Divinity  in  tbc  King's  College  of  old 

Aberdeen. 

Mr.  ANDREW  STRACHAN.  Minister  at  Kintore. 
Mr.  WILLIAM  CUEYNE,  Minister  at  Dyce. 
Mr.  GEORGE  MKI.YIL,  Minister  at  Upper  Macber. 
Mr.  WILLIAM  CHALMERS,  Minister  at  Skeen. 
Mr.  DAVID  Lvr.r.,  Min.  at  Banchorie-Devnie. 
Mr.  DAVID  LINDSAY,  Minister  at  Drnmmaag. 
Mr.  ALKX.  GAIUOCII,  Minister  at  Peter-Coulter. 
Mr.  JOHN  SETOX,  Minister  at  Fovrran. 
Mr.  JOHN  PATERSOX,  Minister  at  Ellon. 
Mr.  GII.BKUT  ANDERSON,  Minister  at  Crnden. 
Mr.  "WILLIAM  MUSHATT.  Minister  at  Slaines. 
Mr.  WILLIAM  SETOX,  Minister  at  Logie-Buchan. 
Mr.  ROBERT  Ooir.viK,  Minister  at  Metblick. 
Mr.  WILLIAM  KEITH,  Minister  at  Udny. 
Mr.  JOHN  Ross,  Minister  at  Birss. 
Mr.  GEORGE  BURNET,  Minister  at  Kincardin. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  SETON,  Minister  at  Lumphanan. 

Mr.  THOMAS  Koss,  Minister  at  Aboync. 

Mr.  LODOVTCK  DUNLOP,  Minister  at  Tarlan. 

Mr.  ARTHUR  Ptoss,  Minister  at  Kinarnie. 

Mr.  ANDREW  SKEEN,  Minister  at  Cluny. 

Mr.  JAMES  FERGUSON,  Minister  at  Glenmnik. 

Mr.  ROBERT  FORBES,  Minister  at  Coldstone. 

Mr.  WILLIA^r  DOUGLAS,  Minister  at  Mid-Marr. 

Mr.  ADAM  BARCLAY,  Minister  at  To\vic. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  DUNCAN,  Minister  at  Kildrimmie. 

Mr.  JAMES  GORDON,  Minister  at  Touch. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  GLASS,  Minister  at  Cnshnie. 

Mr.  GEORGE  GORDON,  Minister  at  Clatt. 

Mr.  THOMAS  THORES,  Minister  at  Daviot. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  FORBES,  Minister  at  Momvheeter. 

Mr.  JOHN  GELLIE,  Minister  at  Kinkell. 

Mr.  ALEXANDER  MIDDLETON,  Minister  at  Rain. 

Mr.  JAMES  WILLOCKS,  Minister  at  Keinnay. 

Mr.  GEORGE  MILNE,  Minister  at  Premnay,  and  Clerk  to  the  Assemblv 

Mr.  ARTHUR  ORE,  Minister  at  Colsalmond. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  BURNE.T,  Minister  at  Inch. 

Mr.  JOHN  STRANG,  Minister  at  Oyne. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  CHALMERS,  Minister  at  Boyndie. 

Mr.  JAMES  CHALMERS,  Minister  at  Cnllan. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  STEVENSON,  Minister  at  Fordyce. 

Mr.  JOHN  WATSON,  Minister  at  Ordewhill. 

Mr.  ANDREW  SIMSON,  Minister  at  Deskford. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  JAFFRAY,  Minister  at  King  Edward. 

Mr.  ALEXANDER  GARDEN,  Minister  at  For<me. 

Mr.  WILLIAM  GRAY,  Minister  at  Anchterless. 

Mr.  GEORGE  MORE,  Minister  at  Rathen. 

Mr.  JOHN  ROBERTSON,  Minister  at  Saint  Fergus. 


JAMES  SHAEP.  39 

April  21th,  the  Parliament  wrote  a  most  dutiful  Letter  to  the  King ; 
and  the  Earl  of  Glcncairn,  Chancellor,  and  the  Earl  of  Eothcs,  President  of 
the  Privy  Council,  were  sent  up  with  it  to  give  a  full  account  of  the  proceed 
ings  and  state  of  affairs  in  Scotland.  Ahout  which  time  Mr.  Eobert  Douglas 
and  Mr.  Sharp  were  called  to  Court ;  but  the  former  excused  himself  by  * 

reason  of  age  and  present  indisposition,  and  the  latter  went  in  company  with 
these  noble  Lords. 

The  King  having  by  singular  acts  of  goodness  restored  Scotland  to  her 
rights  and  laws,  consulted  only  Scots  men  on  Scottish  affairs  ;  and  not  only 
motioned,  but  was  positive,  that  as  the  Government  of  the  State  was  Mon 
archy,  so  that  of  the  Church  should  be  Prelacy ;  and  in  a  Council  held  at 
WMtehal,  Nominated  Mr.  Sharp  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews.  This  was 
agreed  to  by  all  present  there,  except  the  Earl  of  Lauderdale,  who  openly 
entred  his  dissent ;  and  coming  out.  met  Mr.  Sharp  walking  with  the  Earl 
of  Stirling,  to  whom,  with  an  austere  voice  and  threatniug  gesture,  he 
express'd  these  words:  "Mr.  Sharp,  Bishops  you  are  to  have  in  Scotland; 
you  are  to  be  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  ;  but  who  ever  shall  be  the  man, 
by  God,  I  will  smite  him  and  his  Order  below  the  fifth  rib."  And  his  Lord 
ship  was  indeed  as  good  as  his  word  in  many  subsequent  instances. 

Toward  the  latter  end  of  August,  Mr.  Sharp  came  to  Edinburgh,  and 
had  instructions  and  offers  from  the  King  to  some  of  the  most  loyal  and 
leading  of  the  Preachers,  particularly  Mr.  Eobcrt  Douglas  ;  who  indeed 
declined  to  comply  with  Episcopacy,  but  with  no  less  modesty  than  charity 
said  to  Mr.  Sharp,  "  Brother,  I  render  his  Majesty  a  thousand  thanks  ;  but  Douglas' Reply 
I  have  dipt  so  far  in  Oaths,  and  the  concerns  of  the  late  troubles,  and  par-  Episcopate. 
ticularly  in  my  Sermon  before  the  King  at  his  Coronation ;  and  now  being 
turn'd  aged  and  infirm,  I  want  strength  to  sustain  the  weight  of  the  Office, 
and  the  difficulties  I  would  be  obliged  to  encounter.  But  if  you  can  comply, 
who  are  young,  and  ly  not  under  the  same  engagements,  I  neither  can  nor 
will  blame  you."  And  really  this  wise  man's  temper  was  so  moderate  and 
Christian,  that  he  was  a  constant  hearer  of  the  Episcopall  Ministers,  and 
received  the  Sacrament  from  their  hands,  till  an  Indulgence  ensued,  which 
he  thought  absolved  him  from  that  necessity. 

Mr.  Sharp  was  again  call'd  to  Court,  as  also  were  Mr.  Fairfowl,  Mr.  Four  Sees 
Hamilton,  and  Mr.  Leighton,  who  were  Nominated  by  the  King  to  the  Sees 
of  St.  Andrews,  Glasgow,  Galloway,  and  Dumblain;  two  of  whom,  accord 
ing  to  my  best  information,  for  want  of  Episcopal  Orders,  were  first  re- 
ordained  Deacons  and  Priests,  and  then  all  the  four  were  together  Conse 
crated  at  Westminster.  But  since  I  wrote  this,  I  find  both  Mr.  Collier  and 
Mr.  E chard,  and  some  other  Writers  who  have  copied  from  them,  expressly 
say,  that  they  were  all  four  then  Ordained,  as  wanting  lawful  Ordination. 
What  authority  these  gentlemen  have  for  so  writing,  I  know  not.  It  is  true, 
indeed,  that  Dr.  Sharp  and  Mr.  Leighton  had  no  Ordination  till  then ;  but 
for  the  other  two,  'tis  more  than  probable  that  they  were  in  Holy  Orders 


40 


AECHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 


The  other 
Eight  Sees 
filled. 


Episcopacy 
restored. 


T?p.  Burnet's 
compliments. 


before  the  year  1G37,  and  consequently  Ordained  by  a  Bishop.  But  the 
Controversy  is  of  no  great  consequence,  and  only  depends  on  this  question 
in  fact,  Whether  these  were  before  Ordained  or  not  ?  If  they  were,  then 
certainly  only  the  other  two  were  at  that  time  put  in  Orders  ;  if  not,  then  it 
was  necessary  they  should  all  four  be  re-ordained. 

But  these  were  not  the  only  men  of  the  Presbyterian  Brethren  who 
were  then  reconcil'd  to  the  Mitre,  for  no  less  than  six  others  of  them  were 
prcferr'd  to  Episcopal  Sees,  viz.,  Mr.  Haliburton  to  Dunkcld,  Mr.  M-Kcnzie 
to  Murray,  Mr.  Strachan  to  Brechin,  Mr.  Patcrson  to  Pioss,  Mr.  Fletcher  to 
Argyle,  and  Mr.  Wallace  to  the  Isles ;  so  that  ten  of  them  were  advanced  to 
Prelatical  dignities,  tho  by  this  I  do  not  mean  that  all  these  had  Presbyterian 
Ordination.  About  this  time,  also,  the  Sees  of  Edinburgh  and  Aberdeen 
were  iilled  with  Dr.  Wisehart  and  Mr.  Mitchel,  who  had  been  Confessors  for 
Episcopacy  from  the  year  1G38  ;  and  Mr.  Forbes,  the  noble  Earl  of  Teviot's 
Chaplain  at  Dunkirk,  was  advanced  Bishop  of  Caithness ;  and  old  Dr.  Syd- 
scrf  (who  of  all  his  Order  only  lived  to  see  it  restored)  was  Translated  from 
GallowTay  to  Orkney,  and  his  Successor  in  his  former  See  was  Bishop  Ham 
ilton,  as  we  have  already  told. 

In  the  [year]  1GG2,  the  Ancient  Government  of  the  Church  being  fully 
restored,  and  these  mentioned  Bishops  being  wise  and  leading  men,  their 
example  and  influence  drew  the  far  greater  and  better  part  of  their  old 
Brethren  into  their  interest ;  so  that  Episcopal  Government  was  soon 
strengthn'd  by  their  care,  and  carefully  submitted  to  by  the  body  of  the 
people.  The  learned  Dr.  Burnet  (now  Bishop  of  Sarum),  in  his  Preface  to 
the  Life  of  Bishop  Bedel,  informs  us  what  kind  of  men  the  Bishops  of  Scot 
land  about  this  time  were.  "  I  shall  not  (says  he)  add  much  of  the  Bishops 
that  have  been  in  that  Church  since  the  last  re-establishing  of  the  Order, 
but  that  I  have  observed  among  the  few  of  them  to  whom  I  have  the  honour 
to  be  known  particularly,  as  great  and  as  exemplary  things  as  ever  I  met 
with  in  all  Ecclesiastical  History :  not  only  the  practice  of  the  strictest  of 
all  the  ancient  Canons,  but  a  pitch  of  vertue  and  piety  beyond  what  can  fall 
under  common  imitation,  or  be  made  the  measure  of  even  the  most  angelical 
rank  of  men ;  and  saw  things  in  them  that  would  look  liker  fair  ideas  than 
what  men  cloathed  with  flesh  and  blood  could  grow  up  to.  But  of  this  will 
I  say  no  more,  since  those  that  are  concerned  are  yet  alive,  and  their  char 
acter  is  too  singular  not  to  make  them  to  be  as  easily  known,  if  I  enlarged 
upon  it,  as  if  I  named  them." 

And  no  doubt  this  great  man  understood  very  well  what  he  wrote,  and 
knew  to  be  a  truth,  for  they  studied  harmony  and  love  among  themselves, 
and  omitted  no  means  of  being  serviceable  to  the  Church  in  their  respective 
Dioceses. 

Archbishop  Sharp's  methods  were  Christian  and  prudent,  and  attended 
with  very  great  success.  He  entertain'd  his  Clergy  with  much  brotherly 
love  and  respect,  and  Avas  a  great  judge  and  encourager  of  learning,  wisdom, 


JAMES  SHARP.  41 

and  piety,  and  laboured  to  have  all  the  Churches  within  his  jurisdiction 
planted  with  such,  particularly  these  in  the  Shire  of  Fife  ;  and  brought  that 
Country  to  such  a  Conformity,  that  from  being  Presbyterian  and  Covenant 
ing  Fife,  it  became  quite  otherwise  affected  and  principled,  and  so  continues 
to  this  time;  which  shews  the  blessing  and  lasting  strength  of  good  conduct. 

The  hatred  the  Presbyterians  bore  to  the  Order  of  Bishops,  made  them  Hatred  of  the 
even  enemies  to  their  persons.     The  more  rigid  and  violent  of  the  gang  p^ty. 
traduc'd  and  malign'd  the  whole,  particularly  Archbishop  Sharp,  with  the 
falsest,  most  improbable,  and  bitter  invectives   and  lybels  that  could  be 
invented  by  restless,  malicious,  and  calumniating  spirits.     And  no  small 
part  of  the  quarrel  was  because  many  of  them,  they  thought,  had  been  once 
in  their  cause,  but  had  separated  from  them,  and  were  joj-n'd  to  what  they 
believed  was  more  consonant  to  the  Primitive  Institution  of  Ecclesiastical 
Communion  and  ends  of  society. 

Some  of  the  Furiosos  of  the  party  were  incensed  to  what  is  next  to  rage 
and  madness  against  Archbishop  Sharp ;  nay,  their  revenge  and  malice 
brought  them  the  length  of  enthusiasm,  and  pretences  of  Prophecy  that  his 
Death  would  be  violent ;  which  puts  me  in  mind  of  an  ingenious  reflexion 
of  the  witty  Author  of  the  "  Turkish  Spy,"  who  ( rul.  8,  lib.  3,  lei.  10),  writing  ^ftP** 
of  his  barbarous  Murder,  and  the  unparallel'd  rage  of  his  bloody  and  sacri 
legious  enemies,  adds,  "  That  it  was  easy  to  presage  that  he  should  die  a 
violent  Death,  which  they  were  resolv'd  to  execute  themselves." 

The  Archbishop  and  his  Brethren  did  bear  these  unchristian  dealings 
with  a  patience  which  became  their  holy  profession ;  and  considering  their 
cause,  and  the  seditious  party  who  were  their  enemies,  they  esteem'd  their 
afflictions  light,  and  were  no  way  discouraged  for  doing  that  which  they  were 
perswaded  was  their  duty,  expedient,  lawful,  and  necessary,  yet  always 
keeping  themselves  within  the  bounds  of  moderation  and  charity.  For 
although  no  Acts  could  be  better  contriv'd  than  these  were  which  established 
Episcopacy  and  laid  limitations  on  Presbyterian  Preachers,  yet  these  Laws 
were  so  far  from  being  extended  or  rigidly  executed,  that  scarce  was  there 
any  Diocese  where  Presbytery  had  any  tolerable  share  of  the  affections  of 
the  people,  in  which  there  were  not  some  of  these  in  the  exercise  of  their  Preachers  not 
Ministry,  by  the  connivance  and  favour  of  their  respective  Bishops  ;  and 
particularly  in  the  Shire  of  Fife,  there  were  severals  of  them  allowed  to 
enjoy  their  Office  and  Benefice  during  their  whole  lives,  without  being 
molested  by  the  Archbishop.  And  even  when  one  of  these,  who  was  his  old 
acquaintance,  had  indecently  from  the  Pulpit  railed  against  the  whole  Order, 
and  against  himself  in  particular,  all  the  use  he  made  of  it  was,  that  he  said 
to  a  noble  Lord  who  was  his  ordinary  hearer,  "  My  Lord,  tell  my  old  friend, 
your  Minister,  to  live  easy  with  me,  as  I  do  with  him ;  otherwise,  he  will  be 
the  loser,  and  have  himself  to  blame."  But  there  were  some  whom  he  never 
thought  it  a  kindness  done  to  moderation  to  favour,  particularly  Mr.  Gillespie, 
a  pragmatick  and  factious  man  ;  for  when  the  Lord  Sinclair  desired  of  the 

VOL.  II.  F 


42  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Archbishop  to  have  him  settled  Preacher  at  Dysert,  he  answcr'd  his  request, 
"  My  good  Lord  Sinclair,  Mr.  Gillespie  hath  Lorded  it  over  his  Brethren 
more  than  all  the  Bishops  that  I  know  ever  did:  one  Metropolitan  is  enough 
for  Scotland,  and  surely  two  for  the  Province  of  Fife  would  be  too  many." 
Bishop  I  believe  it  was  much  about  this  lime  that  Mr.  Ilonyman,  Archdean  of 

Honcymau.  gt  Andrews,  Published  "  The  Seasonable  Case,"  Ac.,  making  the  terms  of 
Communion  so  very  easy  with  respect  to  Episcopacy,  that  Mr.  Calamy  (one 
of  the  best  and  greatest  Presbyterians  at  the  time)  said,  when  he  read  it, 
"What  would  our  Brethren  in  Scotland  bo  at,  what  would  they  have? 
Would  to  (rod  we  had  these  offers." 

Covenant  and  But  those  who  adher'd  rigidly  to  the  Covenant,  as  affairs  then  stood, 

were  no  less  enemies  to  the  State  than  to  the  Church,  and  thought  that  the 
former's  protecting  the  latter  dissolv'd  their  allegiance  and  obedience  to 
authority ;  so  that  Acts  of  Parliament  were  contravcen'd,  illegal  Meetings 
and  Conventicles  held  and  resorted  to,  the  Covenant  prcach'd  up  and 
renew'd,  barbarous  indignities  offered  to  the  persons  of  Ministers  and  others, 
and  the  Government  baftled  and  insulted.  These  growing  evils  called  for  a 
cure,  and  the  methods  in  order  to  it  were  so  far  from  being  effectual,  that 
the  discontented  party  became  thereby  more  violent  and  outragious  ;  for  now 
they  broke  forth  into  open  Piebellion,  took  up  arms  in  great  numbers,  gave 
a  defiance  to  the  Government,  renewed  their  Covenant  afresh,  and  going  on 
furiously  in  their  blind  career,  us'd  all  hostilities  and  cruelties  against  the 
King's  good  subjects,  as  it  had  been  in  a  lawful  war.  But  a  check  was 
speedily  given  to  their  unaccountable  extravagancies,  for  they  were  cn- 
countred  by  the  King's  Forces  and  routed  at  Pcntland  Hills,  in  anno  IGOO. 
Judges  blamed  Thu  the  courses  then  taken,  all  circumstances  being  considered,  were 
theeLa\vlltmS  suc^  as  no  Society  or  Government  could  avoid  that  had  any  regard  to  its 
own  security  and  preservation,  yet  such  was  the  malice  and  unreasonable 
ness  of  the  party,  that  all  the  measures  and  proceedings  of  the  State  (how 
necessary  soever)  were  branded  with  the  hardest  names  that  a  misled  zeal 
and  violent  principles  could  vomit  up;  and  the  Bishops  were  loaded  with  the 
reproach  of  all,  as  if  the  Oflices  of  State,  Council  Board,  and  Supreme  Courts 
of  Justice  had  been  only  filled  with  them  ;  or  as  if  they,  had  their  inclina 
tions  so  disposed  them,  could  have  influenced  so  many  wise  and  learned 
Judges.  Thu  we  must  not  dissemble  that  two  great  men,  who  had  the  chief 
management,  did  overact  in  some  things,  on  purpose  to  bring  an  odium 
upon  the  Clergy,  which  gave  great  encouragement  to  their  enemies. 

The  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  was  most  particularly  aimed  at,  tliO  his 
share  was  no  more  than  that  of  others  of  the  Privy  Council,  and  very  fre 
quently  less,  as  appeared  plainly  from  his  conduct  in  many  cases  and  dyets, 
as  his  attendance  at  the  Council  only  on  necessary  occasions,  his  declining 
to  move  questions  to  several  criminals,  his  patience  under  their  open  re° 
proaches  and  indecencies,  and  his  absenting  himself  in  time  of  torture,  &c. 
But  neither  his  innocence  nor  character  could  screen  him  from  the  inhumane 


JAMES  SHARP.  -13 

design  of  sons  of  Belial,  who  thought  if  they  could  once  destroy  him,  his 
Order  would  also  follow.  The  first  attempt  to  put  this  hellish  project  in 
execution  was  made  llth  of  July,  1008,  being  Saturday;  for  as  he  came 
down  in  the  evening  from  his  brother's  lodgings,  which  were  over  against 
the  Blackfrier  Wynd,  and  being  placed  in  his  coach,  was  distributing  charity 
to  the  poor,  and  blessing  them,  and  receiving  their  returns,  he,  with  Dr. 
Horn-man,  Bishop  of  Orkney  (who  was  entering  the  coach)  were  assaulted  by 

,,.,    TIT  -i  n     •     •  L  Mitchel  shoots 

a  wicked  ruffian  (Mr.  James  Mitchel  by  name,  whose  son  and  heir  is  present  afc  sharp  all(1 
Preacher  at  Dunoter),  who  shot  at  them  with  a  pistol  eharg'd  with  three  Honeyman. 
balls,  which  broke  the  Bishop  of  Orkney's  left  arm  a  little  above  the  wrest. 
In  the  confusion  occasional  by  so  unexpected  an  event,  the  bloody  assassinc 
made  his  escape  ;  but  being  afterwards  apprehended,  he  own'd  the  fact,  and 
maintain'd  such  principles  as  arc  destructive  to  society  and  hatefull  to  all 
sober  men,  for  which,  in  or  about  the  year  1070,  he  suffered  the  punishment 
due  to  such  execrable  crimes. 

To  quiet  the  minds,  if  possible,  of  these  restless  people,  the  King,  by  indulgence  to 
his  Letter  Dated  at  Whitehall,  7th  of  June,  100'J,  granted  an  Indulgence  the  Preachers- 
(upon  easy  conditions  as  ever  were),  which  many  of  the  best  and  moderate 
of  the  Presbyterian  Preachers  did  embrace,  and  were  actually  planted  in 
Churches.  Tho  this  was  a  dispensing  with  the  Laws  that  had  settled  Epis 
copacy,  and  weakned  its  constitution  and  unity,  yet  it  evidently  shews  that 
the  Government  could  not  be  charged  with  anything  that  descrv'd  the  name 
of  severity  or  persecution  ;  which  Avas  the  senseless  cant  and  language  of  an 
incorrigible  party,  who,  notwithstanding  this  lenity,  still  pursued  their 
rebellious  courses,  renounced  their  allegiance,  &c.  Nay,  they  were  so 
enrag'd  against  the  sober  part  of  themselves  who  accepted  the  lloyal 
favour,  that  they  branded  the  Indulged  Brethren  with  as  ill  names  as  they 
did  the  Orthodox  Clergy,  calling  them  the  King's  Curates,  the  Council's 
Curates,  &c. 

It  may  be  reasonably  enough  supposed,  that  the  Indulgence  was  not 
very  agreeable  to  the  Establish'd  Church,  and  that  these  Statesmen  who 
had  advis'd  the  King  to  grant  it  might  .some  time  or  other  be  call'd  to  an 
account  for  that  and  their  other  proceedings.  Bat  the  Duke  of  Lauderdalc 
(then  Earl,  who  had  the  greatest  hand  in  it)  coming  down  his  Majestie's 
High  Commissioner  to  the  Parliament  that  sat  anno  1000,  overawed  the 
house,  and  acted  after  a  most  arbitrary  manner ;  and  in  November  10th, 
caused  an  Act  be  brought  in,  asserting  his  Majestie's  Supremacy  over  all 
causes  and  persons  Ecclesiastical,  which  he  got  past,  but  not  without  much 
struggle.  By  this  Act  the  intrinsick  power  and  natural  constitution  of  a 
Christian  Church  was  too  nearly  struck  at,  and  left  to  the  mercy  of  the 
Regal.  The  Bishops  therefore  made  all  the  opposition  they  could  against 
it,  and  particularly  Archbishop  Sharp,  who,  arguing  zealously  upon  the 
point,  was  interrupted  and  answered  by  his  Grace  from  the  Throne,  after 
his  Magisterial  way  of  speaking,  "That  my  Lord  St.  Andrews  would  not 


44  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

allow  the  King's  Supremacy  hi  the  terms  of  the  Act,  because  he  suppos'd  he 
design'd  that  for  himself." 

Act  of  Kind's  Various  are  the  accounts  who  gave  first  rise  to  this  Act,  but  . 

Supremacy?  a<rreeci  to  by  many  that  it  was  contriv'd  by  Mr.  Robert  Douglas,  and  several 
of  his  Brethren,  in  concert  with  some  of  the  chief  Ministry,  in  order  to  secure 
and  justify  the  Indulgence,  and  make  it  as  good  as  legal.  Besides,  some  of 
the  Statesmen  had  this  in  their  view,  that  their  actions  in  this  and  other 
affairs  would  be  less  censured  while  two  parties  were  contending;  and  that, 
by  encouraging  them  to  be  jealous  of,  and  bandying  them  against  one 
another,  they  might  serve  their  own  turns  of  either  or  both.  Tho  it  be 
almost  demonstratively  certain  that  the  principal  design  of  this  Act  was  to 
do  a  kindness  to  the  Presbyterian  party,  and  to  justify  all  the  tolerations  or 
favours  these  of  their  faction  could  procure  from  his  Majesty  in  their  behalf, 
and  consequently,  that  it  was  at  first  devised  by  themselves,  yet  so  unrea 
sonable  are  some  men,  that  there  is  not  one  topick  of  slander  and  reproach 
insisted  so  much  upon  by  these  snmc  men  against  the  then  Bishops  and 
Clergy  and  their  Successors,  as  this,  namely,  that  by  this  Act  they  tamely 
gave°up  all  their  priviledges  and  rights,  unchurch'd  themselves,  and  what 
not.  Tho  they  very  well  know  that  the  Bishops  and  Churchmen  could  pro 
pose  no  advantage  to  themselves  by  it,  unless  it  were  to  have  their  rivals 
and  irrcconcileable  enemies  cncourag'd  and  their  interests  promoted,  to  the 
eminent  danger  or  mine  of  their  own,  to  which  this  did  not  a  little  contri 
bute.  And  therefore,  thu  there  were  no  Documents  of  it  yet  extant,  nor 
living  Witnesses  to  inform  us,  yet  we  may  rationally  infer,  that  the  regular 
Clergy,  if  they  were  in  their  right  wits,  could  not  fail  to  oppose  it.  And  so 
they  did,  as  much  as  they  were  able,  and  as  much  as  their  calumniators 
could  have  done,  had  they  been  in  their  place ;  who  in  their  turns  have  more 
than  once  truckl'd  under  the  State,  and  been  made  tools  to  designing  Cour 
tiers,  and  have  as  little  to  boast  of  their  iiitrinsick  power  as  other  people. 
But  it  is  a  Jesuitical  fetch,  a  serpentine  wisdom  divested  of  the  innocence  of 
the  dove,  to  dun  the  world  with  reproaching  the  Episcopal  Clergy  for  suffer 
ing  that  which  they  could  not  help,  and  of  which  they  themselves  were  the 
principal  contrivers,  and  who  only  reap'd  benefit  by  it. 

The  answer  to  this  perhaps  will  be  (for  I  do  not  sec  what  other  they 
can  make),  that  the  Bishops  and  other  Churchmen,  rather  than  suffer  such 
an  Act  to  pass,  should  have  Dimitted  their  Dignities  and  Charges  (as,  by  the 
by,  the  pious  Dr.  Burnet,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  actually  did),  that  is,  they 
should  have  modestly  given  place  to  their  inveterate  enemies,  and  not  only 
have  abandon' d  their  Offices  and  Livings,  but  brought  on  themselves  anew 
all  the  miseries  and  calamities  they  had  suffered  in  the  glorious  dayes  of  the 
Covenant. 

Feud  between  But  to  return  to  our  Archbishop  :  It  was  much  about  this  time  that  a 

Sharp  and        misunderstanding  began,  or  rather  was  wideii'd,  betwixt  him  and  the  Duke 

of  Lauderdale,  who  now  took  a  contrary  course  to  obtain  the  same  end,  and 


JAMES  SHARP.  45 

to  make  good  what  ho  had  thrcatu'd  upon  the  Restoration  of  Episcopacy. 
For  lie  with  his  creatures  and  followers,  and  a  set  of  men  of  his  principles, 
screw'd  up  the  Laws  against  Dissenters  to  a  higher  pitch  than  before,  hut 
with  a  far  greater  design  to  load  the  Church  with  the  scandal  of  severity, 
than  to  rectify  the  disorders  of  the  times  and  the  iinaccountahle  methods  of 
a  giddy  headed  people.  Thus  the  Ecclesiastical  Establishment  had  to  grapple 
not  only  with  the  sober  as  well  as  wild  Presbyterians,  and  Missionaries  from 
Rome,  and  other  despicable  fellows  in  their  shapes,  but  also  with  bosom 
enemies,  and  some  who  ow'd  most  to  the  Royal  bounty,  and  their  underlings. 

While  these  confusions  continu'd  and  were  fomented  in  Scotland,  the 
Church  and  Parliament  of  England  became  mightily  inccns'd  against  the 
Duke  of  Lauderdalc,  who,  finding  himself  in  danger,  laid  aside  his  ordinary 
haughtiness,  and  low'd  his  sails,  and  in  anno  107-i  reconcil'd  himself  to 
Archbishop  Sharp,  who  was  then  at  London ;  by  whose  means  not  only 
Archbishop  Burnet  returned  to  his  Sec,  but  the  Duke  was  readmitted  to  the 
favour  of  old  Dr.  Sheldon,  Archbishop  of  Canterburry,  he  giving  all  the 
signs  of  a  sincere  and  humble  penitent,  after  which  he  never  gave  ground  to 
be  suspected  by  the  Clergy. 

Archbishop  Sharp  having  done  all  the  service  he  could  for  the  Church, 
took  leave  of  the  King  and  the  Court ;  and  this  was  the  last  time  he  had  the 
honour  to  kiss  his  Majestie's  hands  ;  and  returning  to  Scotland  in  August, 
1675,  he  studied  to  bring  affairs  to  unity  and  accommodation,  and  faithfully 
discharged  the  functions  of  his  sacred  Office. 

Having  proceeded  thus  far,  before  I  come  to  the  melancholy  scene  and 
barbarous  Murder  of  this  excellent  person,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  take  a 
short  view  of  the  temper  of  these  people  who  were  the  causes  and  instru 
ments  of  it. 

Such  was  the  state  of  affairs  in  Scotland  from  the  Restoration,  that  Sad  state  of 
never  any  Nation  or  People  had  a  more  merciful  and  mild  King,  who  loved  Setlltlon- 
nothing  more  than  the  ease  and  happiness  of  all  mankind,  but  more  parti 
cularly  of  his  own  subjects.     But  011  the  contrary,  let  us  look  over  all  His 
tory,  yea  Romance  and  Fable  too,  there  is  not  to  be  found  such  a  mutinous 
and  factious  Race,  and  addicted  to  such  tumultuary  and  seditious  practices 
against  all  Society  and  Government,  as  some  of  the  subjects  were  during 
that  Reign.     All  the  Acts  of  grace,  favour,  and  indulgence  had  no  effect  on 
them,  or  could  make  them  capable  of  the  protection  of  Laws,  such  poisonable 
principles  and  practices  were  rooted  in  them. 

Now  and  then  Law  took  place  against  some  of  the  most  notorious 
offenders  among  them,  but  where  one  suffered  a  hundred  were  winked  at. 
But  this,  instead  of  curbing  and  restraining,  heightned  and  encreas'd  the 
malice  and  rage  of  the  rest,  particularly  from  1G75  to  1G79,  insomuch,  that 
the  Furiosos  of  the  party  laid  aside  all  respect  to  the  Laws  of  God,  Nature,  No  Law  owned 
and  of  these  of  the  land;  so  that  murdering  of  common  souldiers,  barbarous  by the  Cove- 
invasions  upon  the  persons  and  families  of  the  Ministers  of  God,  and  affront- 


16  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

ing  everything  that  was  in  the  least  subservient  to  Authority,  were  familiar 
to  them,  and  become  their  common  practice. 

It  was  only  want  of  opportunity  and  power  that  preserved  the  sacred 
persons  of  the  Bishops,  nay,  and  of  tlie  King  himself  too  (whom  they  had 
Excommunicated,  and  design'd  the  Devil's  Vicegerent),  from  being  assas 
sinated  by  their  bloody  hands.  Of  all  these  Fathers  of  the  Church,  their 
prejudice  and  rage  was  mainly  levell'd  against  Archbishop  Sharp.  They 
knew  him  to  be  an  Atlas  for  his  Order,  and  no  less  useful  in  the  State. 
They  thought  if  they  could  once  destroy  him,  they  would  shake  the  very 
fabrick  and  unity  of  the  Government  itself.  These  fears  and  tlireatnings 
little  troubled  that  great  and  good  man,  and  the  rest  of  his  Order,  while 
they  were  conscious  to  themselves  they  were  acting  nothing  without  their 
sphere  ;  and  if  these  tlireatnings  had  any  effects  upon  them,  it  was  to 
strengthen  and  confirm  them  in  the  practice  of  their  Christian  vertttes  and 
habits,  which  prepared  them  for  all  events. 

The  Paper  Towards  the  cue!  of  April,  1670,  a  Paper  was  dropt  in  the  Burgh  of 

droptinCupar.  (jowpci',  full  of  opprobrious  language,  and  insinuations  of  a  design  upon 
Archbishop  Sharp's  person,  who  then  was  at  Edinburgh,  and  had  resolved 
to  go  to  London  to  give  a  fair  representation  to  his  Majesty  of  the  state  of 
affairs,  and  what  was  to  be  done  for  remedying  these  evils.  It  is  believ'd, 
that  if  the  Archbishop  had  gone  straight  to  Court,  his  enemies  had  fail'd  in 
their  design,  and  also,  that  his  wise  counsels  would  have  prevented  much 
blood  and  ensuing  confusions.  That  more  than  the  wild  people  in  Scotland 
were  then  framing  deep  and  treasonable  designs,  I  suppose  is  not  to  be 
doubted.  Nay,  in  the  Court  itself,  there  were  then  an  Absalom  and  Achito- 
phel  too,  who  were  stealing  away  the  hearts  of  the  people  ;  and  they  did  not 
want  many  abettors,  some  of  whom  perhaps  were  the  King's  own  servants. 
And  'twas  against  those,  and  other  Statesmen  too,  who  winked  at  the  times, 
that  Archbishop  Sharp  was  to  have  made  the  complaint.  But  how  far  this, 
among  other  things,  might  have  contributed  to  his  fall,  I  am  not  to  conclude. 
This  much  is  certain,  that  upon  Friday,  May  2d,  he  determined  to  take 
journey  to  St.  Andrews,  with  a  design  to  return  upon  Monday  to  Edinburgh, 
and  thence  to  begin  his  journey  for  Court.  On  Friday's  evening  he  reach'd 
Kennoway,  where  ho  lodg'd  that  night ;  in  which  and  next  morning  he  wTas 
observ'd  to  have  eaten  or  drunk  very  little,  but  was  known  to  have  been 
very  fervent,  and  longer  than  ordinary  in  his  Devotions ;  as  if  God,  out  of 
His  great  mercy,  had  thereby  prepared  him  for  what  he  was  to  meet  with 
from  the  worst  of  men.  His  Religious  behaviour  was  so  much  taken  notice 
that  morning  by  the  pious  and  learned  Dr.  Monro  (who  had  come  to  wait  on 
him),  that  he  said  he  believ'd  he  was  Inspir'd.  So  011  Saturday,  May  3d,  he 
entred  his  coach  with  his  daughter  Isabel,  and  went  on  in  his  journey.  All 
the  way  he  entertain'd  her  with  many  Religious  discourses,  particularly  of 
the  Vanity  of  Life,  the  Certainty  of  Death  and  Judgement,  of  the  necessity 
of  Faith,  Good  Works,  and  Repentance,  and  daily  growth  in  Grace.  As  he 


JAMES  SHARP.  47 

pass'd  by  the  Struthers,  lie  sent  his  servant  with  an  excuse  to  the  Earl  of 

Crawford,  that  he  conhT  not  wait  upon  him  at  that  occasion.     And  as  he 

Avas  going  on,  the  coachman  perceiving  some  armed  men  making  hard  after 

them,  who  look'd  not  like  friends,  calls  to  the  postilion  to  drive  on.     The 

Archbishop  finding  the  coach  run  so  hard,  look't  out  to  see  what  the  matter 

was;  and  perceiving  armed  men  pursuing  him,  he  turned  to  his  daughter, 

and  said,  ;>  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me,  my  poor  child,  for  I  am  gone.''     In 

the  meantime  the  coachman  put  faster  on,  and  outrun  the  most  part  of  these 

ruffians,  while  at  last  one  of  the  best  mounted  of  them  got  before  the  postilion, 

and,  by  wounding  him  in  the  face,  shooting  the  horse  which  he  led,  in  the 

back,  and  cutting  him  in  the  hams,  turned  the  coach  out  of  the  way,  and 

gave   time  to  the  rest  to  come  up,  who  immediately  stopt  the  coach,  by 

cutting  the  harnessing  with  their  swords.     But  now  my  blood  trembles  to 

relate  what  follows.     One  wounded  him  with  the  shot  of  a  pistol,  another 

with  a  small  sword.    Thereafter  they  called  to  him  to  come  out,  upon  which  The  Murder. 

he  composedly  opcn'd  the  coach  door,  and  stept  forth ;  and  while  his  daughter 

was  crying,  and  all  in  tears,  he  besought  them  to  spare  his  life,  and  obtested 

them  not  to  bring  innocent  blood  upon  their  own  heads.     But  all  in  vain. 

Then  he  intreated  them,  through  the  bowels  and  mercies  of  Christ,  that  they 

would  at  least  suffer  him  to  die  patiently,  and  have  some  time  to  recommend 

his  soul  unto  God.     "Which  being  denied  him  (but  would  have  been  granted 

by  the  most  barbarous  of  all  Heathens),  he  fell  upon  his  knees;  and  while 

he  was  holding  up  his  eyes  and  hands  to  ] leaven,  and  powring  out  his  soul 

before  God,  and,  after  the  example  of  his   blessed  Lord,  Praying  for  his 

murtherers,  he  was  first  deeply  wounded  in  the  wrests  and  backs  of  these 

uplifted  hands,  which  they  did  beat  down,  and  then  by  these  bloody  canibals 

massacred  upon  the  place,  having  received  in  his  head  and  other  parts  of  his 

body  twenty-two  great  wounds. 

The  inhumane  monsters  whom  the  Accounts  and  Records  point  out  as  Murderers' 
authors  of  this  unparallel'd  Murther,  were  John  Balfour,  of  Kinloch;  David  namcs- 
Haxton,  of  Rathillet;  George  Balfour,  in  Gilston;  James  Russcl,  in  Kettle; 
Robert  Dingwal,  a  tenant's   son  in   Cadaln;  Andrew   Guillan,  webster  in 
Balmerinoch;  Alexander  and  Andrew  Hendersons,  sons  to  John  Henderson 
in  Kilbrachmont ;  and  George  Flcoming,  son  to  George  Fleeming  in  Bal- 
boothie. 

"With  what  amazement  and  horror  the  account  of  this  sacrilegious  vil- 
lany  was  received  by  all  good  men,  may  be  easily  guessed  at  by  those  who 
have  any  remaining  sparks  of  humanity  or  goodness.  Yet  the  violent  of  the 
party,  and  these  were  no  small  number,  approved  and  extoll'd  the  deed,  and 
justified  it  by  the  examples  of  Moses,  Phinehas,  and  Ehud,  as  may  be  seen 
at  length  in  the  "Hind  let  Loose,"  &c.  But  the  Justice  of  God  and  the 
Laws  of  the  Land  so  overtook  that  misled  people,  that  they  were  soon  made 
sensible  that  Archbishop  Sharp  was  not  the  man  they  took  him  to  be ;  for 
if  while  he  was  alive  some  of  them  wTcre  brought  to  condign  punishment, 


48  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDEEWS. 

which  in  no  sense  was  to  be  imputed  to  him,  yet  he  being  now  dead,  they 
wanted  their  best  friend,  as  to  their  sufferings;  and  the  Government  did  not 
think  fit  to  make  half  of  the  ceremony  as  to  their  punishments  they  did 
before,  as  is  clear  from  the  Records  of  the  Justiciary  and  other  authentick 
Registers. 

Thus  fell  this  great  and  good  man,  by  the  impious  hands  of  nine  fana- 
tick  ruffians  ;  and  in  him  the  Church  was  deprived  of  a  worthy  Prelate,  the 
King  of  a  faithful  Counsellor,  his  Country  of  an  excellent  Patriot,  and  all 
good  men  of  a  sure  friend  and  a  rare  example  of  vertue  and  piety. 

Sharp's  per-  J}ut  to  give  a  more  particular  character  of  him.     In  stature,  he  was  of 

ance.  a!  a,  middle  size  ;  he  had  broad  shoulders,  a  large  breast,  strong  limbs  and 

arms,  well  furnished,  but  no  wayes  dispos'd  to  fatness.  So  that  he  had  all 
the  signs  of  strength  and  a  vigorous  constitution ;  and  this  was  so  apparent, 
that  after  his  barbarous  Murder,  when  his  body  was  inspected  by  Physicians, 
they  declar'd  there  was  no  unsound  symptom  or  natural  decay  in  his  noble 
parts.  He  had  a  comely  forehead,  but  his  eyes  appeared  to  be  somewhat 
sunk,  yet  full  of  life.  His  countenance  was  cheerful,  yet  grave  ;  and  he  had 
a  presence  which  created  a  mixture  of  an  agreeable  respect  and  awe  ;  and 
was  an  absolute  master  of  the  art  of  address,  with  respect  to.  the  quality  and 
condition  of  the  persons  he  had  to  do  with. 

His  virtues.  For  sobriety,  he  was  next  to  a  miracle ;  so  that  his  greatest  enemies, 

and  Calumny  itself,  could  never  charge  him  with  the  least  breach  of  tem 
perance. 

Neither  was  his  charity  less,  in  all  its  excellent  branches.  His  common 
speech  of  those  who  had  always  treated  him  with  the  greatest  spite  and 
malice,  and  to  whose  outragious  and  inhumane  fury  he  at  last  fell  a  sacrifice, 
was,  "  Woe  I  am  for  those  unhappy  people,  for  they  might  live  at  ease,  and 
have  the  protection  of  Laws,  and  differ  as  much  from  us  as  they  will.  But 
alas  !  their  crimes  against  the  State  are  such  that  no  set  of  Hereticks,  much 
less  Orthodox  Christians,  have  attempted  in  any  age  of  the  Church.  Their 
punishments  are  the  natural  issues  of  Treason,  and  their  blood  lies  on  their 
own  heads.  God  help  the  misled  people  who  follow  such  Teachers." 

In  deeds  of  alms,  'and  supplying  the  Avants  of  the  poor,  his  conduct 
prov'd  he  had  more  of  real  goodness  and  charity  than  any  affectation  to  be 
thought  so  ;  so  that  in  the  practice  of  this  vertue,  simplicity,  prudence,  and 
self-denial  were  his  rule,  and  not  ostentation  and  vanity.  His  soul  was  so 
capacious,  and  fill'd  with  such  universal  love,  that  it  was  not  confined  to 
those  of  his  own  principles,  but  extended  itself  to  the  most  necessitous 
objects;  and  if  at  any  time  he  made  distinction,  it  was  to  those  of  the  better 
rank,  upon  whom  poverty  lies  heaviest,  because  they  are  asham'd  to  discover 
their  necessities,  or  to  beg  supplies  from  others ;  and  that  without  any  respect 
to  party.  I  have  it  from  a  wise,  reverend,  and  aged  Presbyter,  who  had  the 
advantage  of  knowing  him  very  well,  that,  to  his  certain  knowledge,  he  hath 
caused  distribute  by  his  Trustees  fifty  Crowns  in  a  morning  to  the  orphans 


JAMES  SHAliP.  -1U 

and  widows  of  the  Presbyterian  Brethren,  without  their  being  acquainted 
from  what  hand  it  came.  And  it  is  now  very  well  known ^ that  a  certain 
Presbyterian  lady  (whose  father  was  the  third  and  most  eminent,  except  one, 
that  suffered  after  the  Restoration)  was  entrusted  by  him  in  dispensing  no 
small  sums  of  secret  charity  to  the  most  needful  of  that  party  which  differed 
so  much  from  him.  And  his  conduct  in  his  family,  and  on  other  occasions, 
to  the  poor,  was  suitable  to  discretion  and  the  true  laws  of  charity. 

He  was  no  friend  to  Pluralities  in  the  Church,  and  he  thought  residence  His  Clerical 
one  of  the  indispensable  duties  of  a  Bishop,  and  was  never  absent  from  St.  couduct 
Andrews  except  when  the  affairs  of  the  Church  and  the  Publick  call'd  him. 
Frequently  he  Preach'd  every  Lord's  Day,  but  at  least  once  in  the  fourteen 
days  ;  and  when  he  was  necessarily  at  Edinburgh,  he  Preached  on  all  Anni 
versary  days,  Festivals,  and  Solemn  occasions.  And  for  that  part  of  the 
Evangelical  function  he  was  happily  qualified,  for  his  Sermons  were  meth 
odical,  grave,  and  pcrswasive,  altogether  free  from  enthusiastick  flights  and 
bitter  invectives,  which  were  then  the  admirable  talents  of  those  denominated 
"  a  Gospel-gifted  Ministry."  That  which  made  all  Ecclesiastical  perform 
ances  easy  to  the  Archbishop,  was  the  great  progress  he  had  made  from  the 
days  of  his  youth  in  the  study  of  the  Creek  and  Latino  Fathers,  the  ancient 
Liturgies,  Councils,  and  Canons  of  the  Church ;  neither  was  he  a  stranger 
to  the  Learning  of  the  Schoolmen. 

In  his  Private  and  Family  Pieligion,  he  was  regular  and  devout.  His 
closet  was  his  first  and  last  retreat  in  the  morning  and  at  night,  where  he 
always  spent  a  considerable  portion  of  his  time  in  Spiritual  Exercises. 

His  house,  when  he  was  at  home,  was  as  it  were  a  College  of  the  Clergy;  His  orjer]y 
and  he  always  kept  at  least  one  Chaplain  to  Officiate  in  his  family  in  times  household, 
of  his  indisposition  or  necessary  absence.     Beading  of  the  Holy  Scriptures 
and  Publick  Prayers  were  alwayes  perform'd  before  dinner  and  supper;  and 
by  way  of  preparative  and  conclusion,  he  never  faill'd  to  bring  into  conversa 
tion  some  excellent,  uscfull,  and  agreeable  remarks,  either  upon  or  relative 
to  the  subject.     And  when  supper  was  over,  and  all  company  remov'd,  he 
entertain'd  his  lady  and  children  after  a  very  taking  and  familiar  way  upon 
some  points  of  Morality  and  Beligion. 

He  was  very  far  from  being  an  enemy  to  the  decent  and  excellent 
Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  but  did  not  think  it  seasonable  that  it 
should  be  introduc'd  before  affairs  should  arrive  to  a  greater  ripeness  and 
disposition. 

In  the  most  tender  sense,  he  was  a  true  Father  of  the  Church,  and  her 
great  support.  His  great  wisdom,  back'd  with  great  resolution,  made  him 
dear  to  the  Clergy  and  dreadful  to  their  enemies. 

He  was  a  firm  friend,  a  great  encouragcr  of  Learning  and  learned  men, 
a  sure  patron  of  Societies,  particularly  of  the  City  and  University  of  St. 
Andrews'.  He  was  a  kind  and  affectionate  husband,  and  happy  in  a  vertuous 
wife ;  a  tender  and  indulgent  father,  and  blessed  with  dutiful  and  obedient 

VOL.  II.  <* 


r,o  AUCHBISHOrS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDKE\YS. 

H»  wife  and    children.    His  wife  was  Mrs.  Helen  Moncrief,  daughter  to  William  Moiierief, 
children.  Laird  of  Bande/ston,  descended  of  tlie   ancient  Family  of  the 

Ilis  children  by  her  were  one  son  and  two  daughters,  viz.  :— 

1.  Sir  William  Sharp,  who  was  provided  by  his  father  to  a  competent 
estate,'  and  Married  Mrs.  Margaret  Erskine,  daughter  to  Sir  Charles  Erskine 
of  Cambo,  Baronet,  Lyon  King  at  Arms,  by  whom  he  hath  a  numerous  and 

hopeful  issue. 

2.  Mrs.  Isabel,  who  was  in  the  coach  with  her  father  at  the  time  oi  his 
barbarous  Murder,  and  was  afterwards  Married  to   John   Cunningham  of 
Barns,  a  gentleman  of  good  note  and  antiquity  in  the  Shire  of  Fife. 

3.  M°rs.  Margaret, 'who  was  Married  to  the  Eight  Honourable  William, 
Lord  Salton.     Both  these  also  have  issue. 

Our  excellent  Archbishop  being  tints  inhumanely  massacred,  to  the 
extreme  loss  and  grief  of  the  King,  the  Church,  and  the  State,  all  things 
were  made  ready  for  his  Funerals,  which  were  performed  after  a  most  sump 
tuous  and  magnificent  manner,  on  the  17th  of  the  same  month,  as  may  bo 
seen  at  length  by  the  curious,  in  the  Bccords  of  the  Lyon-llerauld  Office. 
And  this  was  one" of  the  ways  that  his  nearest  concerns  did  take  to  testify 
the  respect  due  to  the  memory  of  a  man  who,  by  his  eminent  vertues  and 
accomplishments,  did  adorn  and  add  lustre  to  his  high  character  and  dignity. 
Funcnl  Doctor  Patcrson,  then  Lord  Bishop  of  Edinburgh,  Breached  his  Funeral 

Sei™.  Sermon;  and  it  must  be  owned,  that  the  latter  part  of  it  must  have  been  a 

very  mortifying  theme. 

lie  was  Buried  in  the  south  end  of  the  High  Church  of  St.  Andrews, 
where,  at  great  charges,  his  son  erected  a  most  magnificent  and  stately 
Tomb'over  him,  and  has  Mortified  a  certain  sum  to  be  paid  yearly  to  the 
Town  for  preserving  the  fabrick,  and  what's  over  to  be  given  to  the  poor  of 
the  place.  There  is  an  Inscription  on  it,  done  by  his  familiar  and  intimate 
friend,  Dr.  Andrew  Bruce,  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  and  thereafter  of  Orkney, 
which  is  as  follows : — 

F  ,ita  ,h  on  I).  0.  M. 

hi^Tomb.11  Sacratissimi  antistitis,  prudentissimi  scnatoris,  sanctissimi 

martyris, 

cincrcs  pretiosissimos, 
Sublime  hoc  tcgit  mausoleum, 

Hie  iiamque  jacet 

Quod  sub  sole  rclirmum  cst  revereiidissimi  in  Christo  patris, 

D.  D.  Jacobi  Sharp,  Sti  Andreao  archiepiscopi,  totius 

Scotiae  primatis,  &c. ; 

QUEM 

Philosophiac  et  thcologiae  professorem,  academia  ; 

Presbyterum,  doctorcm,  praesulem,  ecclesia  ; 
Turn  ecclcsiastici,  turn  civilis  status  rninistrum  primarium, 

Scotia  ; 

Serenissimi  Caroli  Secundi  monarchicique  imperil 

restitutionis  suasorem, 

Britannia ; 


JAMES  SHARP.  51 

Episcopalis  ordinis  in  Scotia  instauratorem,  Cliristianus 

orbis ; 
Pietatis  exemplum  ;  pacis  angelum ;  sapientiae  oraculum  ; 

gravitatis  imaginem  ;  boni  et  Moles  subditi ; 

Impietatis,  perduellionis  et  scbismatis  liostem  acerrimum, 

Dei,  regis,  et  gregis  inimici  vidcrunt,  agnoverunt, 

admirabautur. 

QUEMQ. 

Talis  et  tantus  cum  esset,  novem  conjurati  parricidae,  fanatico, 

furore  perciti  in  metropoliticae  suae  civitatis  vicinio,  lucente 

meridiano  sole,  charissima  filia  primogenita  et 

domesticis  famulis  vulneratis,  lacrymantibus, 

reclamantibus,  in  genua,  ut  pro  ipsis  ctiam 

oravet,  prolapsum,  quain  pluriniis 

vulneribus  confossum  sclopctis, 

gladiis,  pugionibus,  liorren- 

dum  in  modum  truci- 

darunt,  3  die  Mail. 

1070,  aetatis 

suae  01. 

Mr.  George  Martin  of  Cleremont,  sometime  Commissary  Clerk  of  St. 
Andrews,  tbe  Archbisliop's  own  servant,  in  his  "Historical  Account,  £c.,  of 
the  Bishops  and  Archbishops  of  St.  Andrews,"  gives  the  following  character 
of  him  : — 

The  King  being  restored  to  his  Crown  and  Plights,  and  the  people  to  His  Secretary's 
their  wonted  Religion  and  Loyalty,  his  Majesty,  for  recovering  the  Church  character  of 
from  the  anarchy,  confusion,  and  tyranny  under  which  (through  the  furious 
zeal  of  some  cnthusiastick  Ministers  and  corrupt  Laicks)  it  had  long  groan'd, 
by  a  most  remarkable  step  and  direction  of  Divine  Providence,  hit  upon  and 
imployed  that  great  and  eminent  person,  James  Sharp. 

James  Sharp,  a  man  of  profound  wisdom,  great  courage,  wonderful  zeal 
for  God  and  His  Church;  prudent  in  conduct,  and  indefatigably  laborious 
in  their  service  ;  he,  by  an  unusual  sagacity,  piety,  sense  of  duty,  foresight, 
and  Providence,  revived  and  cherished  the  small  remainder  of  Loyalty  that 
remained  amongst  the  Ministry  of  this  Church ;  and  for  seven  years  main 
tained  the  same  in  life  and  being,  against  all  the  invidious  insinuations  and 
secret  and  open  practices  of  the  undermining  party,  till  the  happy  change. 
And  then  he  piously  and  dexterously  contributed  his  effectual  endeavours, 
most  successfully,  to  the  resettling  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  in  its  ancient 
and  primitive  Officers  and  Government ;  maugre  all  the  opposition  that  he 
met  with  from  diverse  parties  and  persuasions  ;  and  by  God's  blessing,  and 
the  King's  favour  in  his  labours,  he  effectuate  that  great  work  as  if  he  had 
been  born  thereto,  which,  'tis  thought,  hardly  any  other  could  have  done. 
A  learned  Author,  the  "Turkish  Spy,"  gives  him  this  character:  "A  man 
of  an  acute  and  extraordinary  spirit,  of  a  refined  genius  in  sciences,  to  which 
he  brought  no  small  reputation  and  honour,  through  the  vastncss  of  his 
abilities,  his  profound  judgment,  and  dextrous  sagacity  in  all  things  he 
undertook."  He  got  the  high  and  greatest  Ecclesiastical  Dignity  in  the 
Kingdom  from  King  Charles  II.,  after  his  Restoration  to  the  Throne,  as  a 


.52  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

debt  to  his  great  abilities,  and  as  a  reward  to  his  merits  and  services  in 
labouring  might  and  main  to  effect  and  compass  the  King's  Restoration. 
And  he  no  sooner  acquired  this  honour  but  the  enemies  of  Kings  and  Bishops 
in  Scotland  persecuted  him  with  slanders  and  invectives,  and  the  streets 
swarmed  with  libels  against  him,  and  all  because  of  his  endeavours  to  set  up 
Episcopacy  in  Scotland,  which  was  subverted  by  the  Solemn  League  and 
the  usurper  Oliver  Cromwel.  This  fabrick,  as  it  was  of  his  own  raising,  so 
while  he  lived  he  was  the  sole  Atlas  thereof,  upholding  the  same  by  his 
extraordinary  prudence,  watchfulness,  courage,  prayers,  and  tears,  against 
all  its  enemies,  secret  and  avowed,  in  the  State  and  in  the  Church  ;  dis 
appointing  their  designs  and  defeating  their  projects  ;  and  supported  by  his 
own  iunocency  and  duty,  with  the  reverence,  constancy,  and  magnanimity 
proper  to  himself  and  his  character  (undervaluing  all' perils  and  dangers). 
He  encouraged  some,  and  aw'd  many  to  a  complyance.  "Which  eminent 
services  to  God,  the  King,  and  the  Church,  wrought  and  brought  him  to  a 
Crown  of  Martyrdom ;  for  these  procured  him  the  inveterate,  irrcconcilcable 
envy  of  the  fanatick  turbulent  party, 

"  Turba  gravis  paci'placcdavjuc  inimica  quicti,'' 

Whose  mad  fury  caused  his  fall,  by  an  inhumane  and  barbarous  Murder  and 
Parricide,  committed  upon  him  the  3d  of  May,  1079,  in  Magask  Moor,  about 
three  miles  from  his  own  house,  by  nine  Religious  Ruftians  and  Hellish 
Assassins,  thereby  sacrilegiously  robbing  God  and  His  Church  of  a  worthy 
Prelate,  the  King  of  a  faithful  Counsellor  and  Servant,  his  Country  of  an 
excellent  Patriot,  the  Governments  Spiritual  and  Temporal  of  a  sure" Pillar, 
all  good  Subjects  of  a  worthy  Friend  and  Example,  and  myself  of  a  dear  and 
munificent  Patron. 

The  same  Author  has  written  a  Latin  Elogy  of  him,  done  also  to  good 
advantage,  which  therefore  AVO  thought  would  not  be  disagreeable  to  the 
Reader. 

TN    -MEPJTISSmU.M    STI    ANDREW    ARCIUEPISCOPUM. 

8 1  Mali,  (Trucidatum. 
17J1679,  (Tumulatum. 

ELOGIOI  ET  ELEGIA. 

Pdtius  quam  nesciant  poster!, 
Quis  aut  qualis  vir  hie  situs  sit, 
Lapis  e  muro  exclamabit, 
Eique  succinct  lacunar. 

Hie  inlmmatur 

Eximius  et  perillustris  D.D.  JACOBUS  SHARPIUS, 

Septentrionalis  Scotiae  alumnus ; 

Apud  D.  Leonardum  Philosophia3  Professor ; 

Ecclesiffi  Caraliensis  Pastor, 

S.  S.  Theologian  in  Lyceo  D.  Maria?  Professor, 

Academic  Rector,  et  Caucellarius, 

Sancti  Andreas  Archipraasul  et  Protomysta, 

Ecclesias  Scoticana?  et  Ecclesiasticorurn 


JAMES  SHARP.  03 

Metroplita,  Primas,  ac  longe  primus, 

Priscorum  Pontificum,  et  avitorum  Antistitum  nulli  secuiitlus, 

Forsitan  ct  multis  antefercnclus. 

Quippe  qui 

Consilio,  nixu,  et  ausis  felicibus, 

Piegeni  exulem  populo,  et  populum  Regi  restituit, 

Utrique  restitute  ndelem  operam  navavit, 

lluiuas  nostras  reparavit, 

licmpublicam  labefactatam  redintegravit, 

Yulucra  Democratise  per  Monarcliiam, 

Presbyteranismi  per  Episcopatum,  unictis  sanavit, 

Ptcligionem  prope  obsoletam  reformavit, 

Ecclesiam  fcedatam  purgavit, 

Purgatam  instauravit , 

Instauratam  rexit,  protexit ; 

Orthodoxos  Ministros  fovendo, 

liegimen  Ecclesi'asticum  propugnando, 

Vincfe  sepcm  integram  conservando, 

Hipocrysi,  fuco,  et  dolo  obviam  cundo, 

Novationes,  ct  novaturientes  Fanaticismos  debellando. 
Vera)  igitur  Ecclcsise,  rcligionis  primaiYa?,  recta>quc  fidci 
Propugnaculum,  Assertor,  Yiudex  ad  extrcmuin  spiritum. 

Idcirco, 

Inter  opcrarios  Diviuos  Deo  pcrquam  gratus, 

Atquc  magnnm  ipsius  erga  Ecclesiam  currc  excmplum  : 

Inter  Consiliarios,  llegi  in  primis  intimus,  ccrtus  ct  fidus. 

Gloriam  qnamvis  nactus,  neutiquam  tanien  captans  : 

Ecclesiao,  Patriip,  propter  indefessos  laborcs  earns, 

Omnibus,  pi\'cterquam  a  focdis  sacrilcgis, 

Et  scelestis  sicariis,  dcsideratus, 

A  quibus  passus  cst  parricidium,  Martyrium. 

Quorum 

Livorem,  immanitatem,  rabiem, 
Feritatcm,  ictus,  et  vuliiera, 
Patientia,  caritate,  prcecibus, 
Pietate,  seqauimitate, 
(Deo,  licgi,  et  Ecclesia)  sacratus) 
Tulit,  sprevit,  frcgit,  ct  superavit. 

At  plagis  confossus,  perfidorum,  perditorum,  manibus  occubuit. 
A  sole,  coelo,  quatriduo  deploratus,  omnibus  sanctis  in  sccula  dcflondus. 
Hinc  migrans  tiaram  liuquens,  aurcolam  adcptus  cst. 
It  a  parentat  pristinus  cliens, 
Cujus  mine  jubilum  in  gcmitum, 
Et  gaudium  in  planctum  versuin  cst. 

The  ingenious,  and  such  as  had  any  skill  in  Poetry,  both  of  the  Clergy 
and  others,  wrote  so  many  Characters,  Epitaphs,  and  Funeral  Elegies  upon 
him,  with  Satyrs  on  the  horridness  of  the  crime,  that  I  am  perswadcd,  were 


54  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

they  collected  together,  they  would  make  up  a  Volume  by  themselves  ;  but 
that  I  might  not  grate  the  Reader's  ears  by  dwelling  too  long  upon  the 
melancholy  theme,  I  have  contented  myself  with  the  two  former  Inscriptions. 
What  I  have  advanc'd  in  these  Memoirs,  is  from  the  authority  of  his 
nearest  friends  and  relations,  and  other  persons  of  undoubted  credit  and 
veracity,  who  had  the  advantage  of  knowing  himself,  and  several  particulars 
relating  to  him.  My  other  vouchers  are  the  Records  of  Parliament  and 
Council,  with  other  publick  and  private  Papers  of  those  times,  and  especially 
the  Letters  I  have  mention'd  above.  But  for  the  greater  satisfaction  of  the 
curious,  I  have  thought  fit  to  subjoyn  the  most  material  of  them  in  the  fol 
lowin  A>it'>nl!,r. 


APPENDIX  OF  ORIGINAL  LETTERS  AND  PAPERS, 

RELATING  TO  ARCHBISHOP  SHAIU''s  LIFE  AND  liARIUROUS  MURDER. 


I-  —  --I  Lette 


at 


Reverend  Friends,  —  I  received  yours  by  Mr.  Sharp,  who  is  dear  to  me 
upon  many  accounts,  as  my  very  good  friend  ;  but  coming  with  your  recom 
mendation  upon  so  good  and  worthy  an  errand,  I  cannot  but  receive  him  as 
the  Minister  of  Christ  and  the  Messenger  of  his  Church  ;  and  you  may  be 
assured  that  I  shall  improve  my  utmost  interest  for  the  preservation  of  the 
rights  of  your  Church,  and  shall  do  what  I  can  for  that  afflicted  Country, 
which  I  have  great  reason  to  love  and  lie  tender  of,  having  experienced  so 
much  kindness  from  you.  I  doubt  not  but  you  will  have  a  further  account 
from  Mr.  Sharp  of  my  great  affection  to  serve  you,  and  that  it  shall  be  my 
care  to  endeavour  that  the  Gospel  Ordinances  and  privilcdges  of  God's  people 
may  be  established  both  here  and  there  with  you.  I  do  desire  your  Prayers 
to  God  for  His  blessing  upon  our  counsels  and  undertakings';  and  intrcat 
you  that  you  would  be  pleased  to  promote  the  peace  and  settlement  of  these 
Nations  ;  and  in  what  you  may  quiet  and  compose  men's  spirits,  that  we 
may,  waiting  with  patience,  reap  the  fruits  of  our  hopes  and  fears.  I  have 
no  further,  but  to  beg  of  God  the  increase  of  Divine  blessings  upon  your 
labours,  and  that  you  may  be  kept  by  His  power,  as  glorious  instruments  in 
His  work;  and  desire  you  to  be  assured,  that  none  shall  be  more  careful  to 
preserve  your  Profession  in  that  honour  they  so  much  deserve,  than  he  who 
is  Your  assured  friend  and  servant, 

GEORGE  MONCK. 
Draper's  Hall,  1C  Febr.,  1059. 

IL—  A  Letter  from  sotne  Ifinistent  in  London  to  the  Ministers  at  Edinlimjlt. 

Reverend  and  beloved  Brethren,—  We  had  sooner  returned  our  thanks 
to  you  lor  your  brotherly  salutation  and  remembrance  of  us,  but  that  we 
expected  the  convemency  of  Mr.  Sharp's  return,  hoping  by  that  time  things 
would  grow  to  such  a  consistency  that  we  might  be  able  to  give  you  a  satis 
factory  account  of  the  state  of  Religion  among  us.  We  do  with  you  heartily 
rejoice  in  the  return  of  our  Soveraign  to  the  exercise  of  Government  over 


JAMES  SHAH  P.  55 

these  his  Kingdoms;  and  as  we  cannot  but  own  much  of  God  in  the  way  of 
bringing  it  about,  so  we  look  upon  the  thing  itself  as  the  fruit  of  Prayers, 
and  a  mercy  not  to  be  forgotten.  Hitherto  our  God  hath  helped  us  in  break 
ing  the  formidable  power  of  sectaries,  causing  them  to  fall  by  the  violence  of 
their  own  attempts,  and  in  restoring  to  us  our  ancient  Government,  after  so 
many  shakings  (the  only  proper  basis  to  support  the  happiness  and  just  lib 
erties  of  these  Nations),  and  freeing  us  from  the  many  snares  and  dangers  to 
which  we  were  exposed  by  the  former  confusions  and  usurpations.  Therefore 
we  will  yet  wait  upon  the  Lord,  "\Vlio  hath  in  part  heard  us,  uutill  all  those 
things  concerning  which  AVC  have  humbly  sought  to  Him  be  accomplish!  and 
brought  about.  We  heartily  thank  you  for  your  kind  and  brotherly  encour 
agements,  and  shall  in  our  places  endeavour  the  advancing  of  the  Covenanted 
Reformation,  according  to  the  bonds  yet  remaining  upon  our  consciences, 
and  our  renewed  professions  before  God  and  man;  and  though  we  cannot 
but  forsee  potent  oppositions  and  sad  discouragements  in  the  work,  yet  AVC 
hope  our  God  will  carry  us  through  all  difficulties  and  hazards,  and  at  length 
cause  the  foundations  now  laid  to  encrcasc  unto  a  perfect  building,  that  the 
top-stone  may.be  brought  forth  with  shoutings,  and  His  people  cry,  Grace, 
grace  unto  it. 

We  bless  God,  in  your  behalf,  that  your  warfare  is  in  a  great  measure 
accomplished,  and  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  the  interests  thereof,  so  far 
owned  in  Scotland,  as  to  be  secured,  not  only  by  the  uniform  submission  of 
the  people,  but  also  by  Laws,  and  those  continued  by  the  Royal  assent ;  a 
complication  of  blessings  which  yet  the  Kingdom  of  England  hath  not 
obtained,  and  (though  we  promise  ourselves  much  from  the  wisdom,  piety, 
and  clemency  of  his  Pioyal  Majesty)  through  our  manifold  distractions,  dis 
tances,  and  prejudices,  not  like  suddenly  to  obtain.  Therefore  we  earnestly 
beg  the  continuance  of  your  Prayers  for  us,  in  this  day  of  our  conflict,  fears, 
and  temptations  ;  as  also  your  advice  and  counsel,  that  on  the  one  side  we 
may  neither  by  any  frowardness  and  rigid  counsels  of  our  own,  hazard  the 
peace  and  safety  of  a  late  sadly  distempered  and  not  yet  healed  Nation  ;  and 
on  the  other  side,  by  undue  compliances,  destroy  the  hopes  of  a  begun 
Reformation.  We  have  to  do  with  men  of  different  humours  and  principles. 
The  general  stream  and  current  is  for  the  old  Prelacy,  in  all  its  pompe  and 
height;  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  hoped  for  that  the  Presbyterial  Govern 
ment  should  be  owned  as  the  publick  Establishment  of  this  Nation,  while 
the  tide  runneth  so  strongly  that  way;  and  the  bare  toleration  of  it  will  cer 
tainly  produce  a  mischief,  whilst  Papists  and  Sectaries  of  all  sorts  will  wind 
in  themselves  under  the  covert  of  such  a  favour.  Therefore  no  course 
seemeth  likely  to  us  to  secure  Religion,  and  the  interests  of  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord,  but  by  making  Presbytery  a  part  of  the  publick  Establishment,  which 
will  not  be  effected  but  by  moderating  and  reducing  Episcopacy  to  the  form 
of  Synodical  Government,  and  a  mutual  condescendence  of  both  parties  in 
some  lesser  things,  which  fully  come  within  the  latitude  of  allowable  differ 
ences  in  the  Church.  This  is  all  we  can  for  the  present  hope  for,  and  if  we 
could  obtain  it,  should  account  it  a  mercy,  and  the  best  expedient  to  ease 
his  Majesty  in  his  great  difficulties  about  the  matter  of  Religion ;  and  we 
hope  none  that  fear  God  and  seek  the  peace  of  Sion,  considering  the  per 
plexed  posture  of  our  affairs,  will  interpret  this  to  be  any  tergiversation  from 
our  Principles  or  apostacy  from  the  Covenant.  But  if  we  cannot  obtain  this, 
we  must  be  content  with  Prayers  and  tears  to  commend  our  cause  to  God, 


50  AKCHBIS1IOPS  OE  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  A 

and  by  meek  and  humble  sufferings  to  wait  upon  Him  until  lie  bo  pleased 
to  prepare  the  hearts  of  -the  people  for  His  beautiful  work,  and  to  bring  His 
ways  (at  which  they  arc  now  so  much  scandahYd)  into  request  with 

Thus  we  have  with  all  plainness  and  simplicity  of  heart  lay  d  forth  our 
straits  before  you.  AVc  again  beg  your  advice  and  Prayers,  and  heartily 
recommend  you  to  the  Lord's  grace,  in  AYhom  we  are 

Your  loving  Brethren  and  fellow-labourers 
in  the  work  of  the  Gospel, 

Emi.  CALAMY. 

SIMEON  ASIIE. 

London,  August  10th,  1GGO.  TIIO.  MANTON. 

Directed  tJnis:  To  our  reverend  and  highly  esteemed  Brethren,  Mr  David 
Dickson,  Mr.  liobert  Douglas,  Mr.  James  Hamilton,  Mr.  John  Smith,  Mr. 
George  Ilutchinson,  Edinr. 

HI.— Letters  from  Mi:  Wutri>  to  Mr.  llolert  ])mi'jl<tx,  Minister  at  F.iHulunjli. 

1. 

Reverend  Sir,— Yours,  that  May  22d,  and  of  the  8th,  with  other  Letters, 
I  received.     By  the  last  Saturday's  Post,  I  could  only  give  you  notice  of  my 
safe  return  to  London.     General  Monck  gave  the  occasion  for  my  journey 
to  Holland;  and  I  did  observe  a  Providence  in  it,  that  his  motion  did  tryst 
with  your  desire,  which  gave  me  encouragement  to  follow  the  Lord's  pointing 
at  my  going  thither,  which  for  any  thing  doth  yet  appear  hath  been  ordered 
for  good.    'General  Monck's  intent  for  my  going  was,  that  I  might  give  his 
Majesty  an  account  of  all  the  passages  of  his  undertaking,  from  the  begm- 
nhi"  of  it  in  Scotland  to  the  progression  he  had  made  at  the  time  of  the 
Parliament's  owning  his  Majestie's  Title;  and  that  1  might  acquaint  the 
King  how  necessary 'it  was  to  follow  the  counsels  of  moderation  in  the  future 
management  of  his  affairs ;  and  3ly,  that  I  might  move  his  Majesty  for 
writing  a  Letter  to  some  of  the  eminent  City  Ministers,  to  be  by  them  com 
municated  to  the  Presbyterian  Ministers  throughout  the  Kingdom,  intimat 
ing  his  Majestie's  resolution  to  bear  down  profanity,  and  to  countenance 
Religion  in  the  power  of  it.    My  own  special  motive  for  going  was,  to  give  a 
timous  information  of  the  condition  of  poor  Scotland,  as  to  the  several  par 
ticulars  which  yours  of  May  8th  doth  bear.     My  thoughts  at  my  going  over 
did  run  upon  diverse  of  these  which  digestedly  and  fully  that  Letter  doth 
mention,  and  it  hath  much  satisfied  me  that  upon  the  perusal  of  yours  at 
my  return,  I  rcmcmbred  I  hit  upon  some  of  those  you  touched.     I  came 
very  seasonably  in  the  beginning  of  the  growth  of  the  Court,  and  was  the 
first  Minister  of  the  Kingdoms  who  made  an  Address  avowedly  to  the  King 
since  his  exile ;  which  I  did  with  the  more  confidence,  that  having  your 
Wai-rand,  before  my  going,  made  it  in  name  of  the  body  of  the  Ministry  of 
the  Church  of  Scotland,  who  had  persever'd  in  their  integrity  and  loyalty 
in  all  Pie  volutions.     I  cannot  express  what  welcome  I  had,  and  _  with  how 
kindly  an  acceptance  my  application  was  entertained  by  his  Majesty,  who 
was  graciously  pleased  to  put  such  a  respective  usage  upon  me  all  the  time 
I  was  there,  as  it  was  noticed  by  all  at  Court.     I  do  not  mention  this  out  of 
a  tickling  vanity,  but  as  an  evidence  amongst  others  of  our  Prince's  affection 
to  our  Countrey  and  Kirk,  of  which  I  am  aboundantly  satisfied ;  though 


JAMES  SHARP.  57 

before  my  going  over,  lie  was  falsely  represented,  even  to  some  of  the  Pres 
byterian  judgment,  as  an  enemy  and  Later  of  both.    He  did  at  P>reda,  at  his 
table  upon  occasion,  give  his  publick  testimony  to  the  fidelity  and  loyalty  of 
his  Kingdom  of  Scotland,  and  to  me  in  private  more  than  once  or  twice  ; 
and  I  am  perswaded  a  sweeter  and  more  affectionate  Prince  never  a  people 
had.     The  first  time  he  allowed  me  to  speak  to  him  in  private,  which  was 
for  the  space  of  one  hour  and  half,  I  took  it  up  in  giving  a  full  account  of 
General  Monck's  proceedings,  and  of  the  activity  of  those  of  our  Nation  to 
improve  that  opportunity  for  his  Majcstie's  service.    The  next  time  he  called 
me  to  him  in  the  garden,  where  he  caused  me  walk  with  him,  almost  200 
gentlemen  being  at  his  back.    Almost  two  hours  was  imployed  in  his  moving 
questions  and  my  answering,  about  the  affairs  of  the  Parliament :  and  in  the 
close,  somewhat'in  reference  to  Scotland,  and  asking  kindly  how  it  was  with 
the  Ministers  Avho  had  been  in  the  Tower,  and  with  Mr.   Hutchison,  Mr. 
Wood,  Mr.  Bayly,  of  which  I  gave  you  some  touch  in  my  Letter  from  Breda. 
The  3d  time  lie  spoke  to  me  (doing  it  upon  every  occasion  he  saw  me)  was 
in  the  Princess  Royal's  Room,  where  I  was  amazed  to  hear  him  express  such 
knowledge  and  remembrance,  both  as  to  persons  and  things  relating  to  Scot 
land,  while  he  was  there,  as  if  the  passages  had  been  recently  acted.     He 
mentioned  Ministers   South  and  North,  and  other  persons,  not  forgetting 
John  Boswel  of  Kinghorn,  and  another  in  Crail,  where,  he  said,  himself  was 
Provost,  asking  how" it  was  with  them.     There  was  opportunity  of  speaking 
of  those  with  whom  we  have  had  so  much  vexation,  and  of  the  condition  of 
our  Kirk,  and  the  carriage  of  honest  men  in  it ;  and  had  he  not  been  taken 
up  by  the  interposing  of  a  Lord  come  straight  from  England,  I  think  I  had 
said  all  was  then  upon  my  heart  in  reference  to  that  matter.     After  this  the 
Court  thronging  by  multitudes  from  England,  and  the  croud  of  his  affairs 
growing  upon  him,  it  was  unbecoming  for  me  to  press  for  private  conference, 
but  when  he  did  call  to  me,  which  he  was  pleased  to  do  twice  more  before 
his  coming  from  Breda  ;  and  both  those  times  he  asked  me  only  about  some 
of  his  concernments  with  General  Monck,  bidding  me  at  the  last  time  meet 
him  at  his  first  coming  to  the  Hague,  which  was  upon  May  15th,  wait  upon 
to  receive  my  dispatch  immediately  to  England,  both  as  to  General  Monck 
and  the  Letter  to  the  City  Ministers.     AYhcn  I  offered  to  speak  a  word  in 
reference  to  Scotland,  he  told  me  he  would  reserve  a  full  communing  about 
that  till  his  coming  to  England.     And  indeed  it  had  been  unseasonable  and 
impertinent  for  me  to  have  urged  further,  finding  the  necessity  of  his  affairs 
in  England  so  urgent ;  but  this  I  can  say,  that  by  all  these  opportunities  I 
had,  in  every  of  which  I  did  not  omit  the  moving  about  Scotland,  I  found 
his  Majesty  resolved  to  restore  the  Kingdom  to  its  former  Civic  liberties,  and 
to  preserve  the  settled  Government  of  our  Church;  in  both  which  I  was  bold 
expressly  to  move,  and  had  a  very  gracious  satisfying  answer.     Upon  the 
apprehension  that  I  might  be  sent  into  England  presently  upon  his  Majestie's 
arrival  at  the  Hague,  I  hastned  from  Breda  by  the  way  of  Dort,  Amsterdam, 
Harlem,  and  Leyden,  to  take  a  transient  view  of  those  goodly  Towns,  and 
came  the  next  day  after  the  King  to  the  Hague,  about  the  very  time  of  the 
Reception  of  the  Commissioners  from  the  two  Houses  and  the  City,  to  which 
I  was  an  eye-witness.     Dr.  Reynolds,  Mr.  Calamy,  Dr.  Spoistre,  Mr.  Case, 
Mr.  Mantou,  were  received  privately  in  his  Bed- Chamber.    They  delivered  a 
Letter  Signed  by  above  80  Ministers,  met  at  Sion  Colledge.    I  am  promised 
a  Copy  thereof,  which  I  shall  send  unto  you  (and  had  done  it  before  this, 

VOL.  II.  H 


58  AltCILUISIIOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDP^YS. 

could  they  have  given  me  one,  "because  they  had  left  it  in  the  City).     They 
expressed  much   satisfaction  with  his   Majestie's    carriage    towards    them, 
speaking  him  to  he  a  Prince  of  a  deep  knowledge  of  his  own  affairs,  of  sin 
gular  sweetness  and  moderation,  and  great  respectiveness  towards  them  ; 
hut  they  were  much  more  satisfied  as  to  these  after  they  had  spoke  with  him 
two  by' two,  in  private,  three  days  after,  in  so  far  as  they  speak  highly  to 
his  commendation  to  all  their  friends,  as  a  most  excellent  Prince,  restored 
for  a  puhlick  hlessing  to  these  Nations;   and  do  profess  it  to  he  their  duty 
to  promote  his  interest  amongst  their  people.     They  have  often  since _said 
to  me,  they  have  no  reserve  nor  hope  hut  in  his  Majesty's  good  disposition 
and  clemency.     At  my  coming  to  the  Hague,  when  I  had  gone  to  the  Lord 
Chancellor,  who  hy  the  King's  order  was  to  give  me  my  Dispatches,  he 
desired  me  to  stay  so  long  as  the  London  Ministers  stay'd,  telling  me  he 
would  send  hy  another  the  King's  pleasure  to  General  Monck.     I  was  ready 
to  lay  hold  upon  this  motion,  knowing  that  the  King  was  speedily  to  go  for 
England,  and  so  kept  in  company  with  those   Ministers,  and  therehy  had 
occasion  to  know  what  may  give  me  ground  of  a  probable  conjecture  of  the 
tendency  of  matters  as  to  the  ordering  of  Religion  in  England,     i  have  much 
to  say  of  this  purpose,  which  I  cannot  communicate  in  this  way.     At  present 
I  shall  only  say  this,  that   for  me  to  press  uniformity  for  Discipline  and 
Government  upon  the  King  and  others,  1  lind,  would  he  a  most  disgustful 
imployment,  and  successless.     For  though  the  King  could  he  induced  to  he 
for  it,' it  were  not  in  his  power  to  effectuate  it,  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament 
and  the  hody  of  this  Nation  hcing  against  it.     And  if  I  may  speak  what  I 
know,  and  could  demonstrate  to  you,  it  is  already  past  remedying.     I  know 
very  few  or  none  who  desire  it,  much  less  appear  for  it  ;  and  whoever  do 
report  to  you,  or  helievc,  that  there  is  a  considerable  party  in  England  who 
have  a  mind  for  a  Covenant-Uniformity,  they  are  mistaken:  and  as  you 
judge,  by  what  you  write  in  that  of  May  Sth,  if  they  themselves  will  not 
'press  it,' we  are  free.     I  see  no  obligation  by  Covenant  to  impose  that  upon 
them  which  they  care  not  for.     If  you  knew  at  a  distance  what  I  have  occa 
sion  to  know  since  my  coming  hither,  of  this  matter,  I  am  confident  you 
would  not  be  very  urgent  in  that  point.      For  my  part,  I  shall  have  no 
accession  to  what  may  cross  that  uniformity;  but  I  have  no  freedom  to  an 
imployment  which  can  have  no  other  effect  but  the  hcightning  of  an  odium 
upon  our  Church,  which  is  obnoxious  already  to  many  upon  such  an  account, 
though  I  know  causelessly.     I  have  heard  of  your  Letter  to  Mrs.  Calamy, 
Aslic,  and  Manton ;  which  Mr.  Ashe  only  hath  seen,  Calamy  and  Manton 
not  being  in  Town  ;  and  the  rumor  goes  up  and  down  the  City  (I  know  not 
if  occasion  be  taken  by  that  Letter),  that  the  Ministers  of  Scotland  have 
declared  their  dissatisfaction  that  the  King  is  brought  in  but  upon  the  terms 
of  the  Covenant.     I  am  afraid  that  such  rumors  are  at  this  juncture  studi 
ously  raised,  and  I  see  more  and  more  the  need  we  have  of  using  caution 
with  those  here.     We  have  had  large  experience  of  Anglorurn,  &c.,  and  I 
have  cause  to  think  that  we  shall  have  a  discovery  of  it  as  much  now7  as  ever. 
I  shall  present  your  Letter  to  his  Majesty  at  the  first  opportunity,  which 
I  think  I  cannot  have  till  some  dayes  pass  over,  because  of  the  great  press 
upon  him  at  his  first  entry  into  Whitehall.     God  hath  done  great  things  for 
him  ;  I  pray  He  may  do  great  things  by  him.     It  hath  been  observed,  that 
never  any  Prince  did  enter  upon  his  Government  with  such  a  general  repute 
and  applause.     The  satisfaction  expressed  by  the  Dutch  could  not  be  more 
if  he  had  been  their  Soveraign ;  and  for  England,  the  expressions  of  extatick 


JAMES  SHAEP.  59 

joy  and  universal  exultation  are  admirable.  This  day,  from  morning  till  7 
a  clock,  I  have  been  a  spectator  of  what  the  magnificence  and  gallantry  of 
England  could  bring  forth  in  testimony  of  the  greatest  reception  was,  they 
say,  ever  given  to  their  King ;  the  manner  whereof  you  will  have  by  the 
Diurnal ;  and  it  hath  taken  up  so  much  time  to  me,  that,  the  Post  calling, 
I  have  confusedly  writ  this,  and  must  break  off  till  the  next,  with  commend 
ing  you  to  the  Lord's  grace,  who  am  Yours,  &c., 

London,  May  2(.)th.  JA.  SHARP. 

2. 

Reverend  Sir, — I  have  received  none  from  you  by  this  Post.  This  day 
the  King  called  for  me,  and  heard  me  speak  of  our  Church  matters,  which  I 
perceive  he  does  thorowly  understand,  and  remcmbred  all  the  passages  of 
the  publick  Resolutions.  lie  was  pleased  again  to  profess  that  lie  was 
resolved  to  preserve  to  us  the  Discipline  and  Government  of  our  Church,  as 
it  is  settled  amongst  us.  \Vhcn  I  spoke  of  his  calling  a  General  Assembly, 
he  said  lie  would  call  one  how  soon  lie  could;  but  he  thought  the  Parliament 
would  be  called  and  sit  first.  I  found  the  end  of  his  Majesty's  calling  fur 
me,  was  to  give  me  notice  that  he  thought  it  not  convenient  to  send  for 
Ministers  from  Scotland  at  present :  when  his  affairs  were  here  brought  to 
some  settlement,  he  would  then  have  time  and  freedom  to  speak  with  them, 
and  to  send  for  them  to  come  to  him.  lie  thought  it  was  lit  for  me  to  go 
down  and  give  you  notice  of  this,  and  the  state  of  his  affairs  here,  and  said 
that  he  would  write  by  me  to  you,  and  called  to  one  of  his  Bed-Chamber  to 
seek  for  your  Letter,  which  I  delivered,  saying  it  would  be  found  in  one  of 
his  pockets,  and  a  return  should  bo  sent,  and  my  Dispatch  prepared  this 
next  week.  I  find  his  Majesty  speaking  of  us  and  our  concernments  most 
affectionately,  and  that  I  needed  not  to  inform  him  of  the  usage  we  have 
had  from  the  Rernonstrators.  There  hath  been  since  some  talk  in  the  City 
of  a  Petition  from  the  Ministers  about  Religion,  but  some  leading  men  not 
thinking  it  expedient,  it  is  waved.  Mr.  Calamy,  Dr.  Reynolds,  and  Mr. 
Manton  were  Sworn  yesterday  Chaplains  in  Ordinary  to  his  Majesty,  by  the 
Earl  of  Manchester,  Lord  Chamberlain.  Some  say  Mr.  Baxter  is  to  be 
admitted  one  also.  They  have  this  indulged  to  them,  that  when  it  is  their 
course,  they  shall  not  be  tyed  to  Officiate  at  the  Liturgy ;  but  others  having 
performed  that  Service,  they  shall  be  only  tyed  to  Preach,  till  they  be  clear 
to  do  it.  The  King  hath  ordered  a  Letter  to  Dr.  Reynolds  and  Mr.  Calamy, 
intimating  that  they  may  Nominate  ten  to  themselves  of  their  judgment,  to 
meet  in  a  Conference  about  the  settling  of  the  Church,  with  twelve  of  the 
Episcopal  party,  whom  he  would  Nominate  himself.  In  the  meanwhile  the 
Episcopal  men  increase  and  get  ground.  One  of  the  King's  Chaplains  was 
made  Dean  of  Westminster  the  other  day,  and  Dr.  Cousins  Dean  of  Durham. 
They  talk  as  if  there  were  diverse  Nominated  to  lie  Bishops  in  Ireland.  I 
find  that  it  is  intended  that  the  Field  Forces  bo  withdrawn  from  us  how  soon 
can  be,  but  that  the  Garrisons  be  kept  still,  till  the  King's  affairs  take  settl 
ing.  Some  stumble  at  this  exceedingly,  others  are  satisfied  after  they  have 
spoke  with  the  King  and  known  his  mind.  The  Lord  Broghill  is  come  to 
Town,  and  does  remember  you  all  very  kindly.  The  Earl  of  Cassils  and 
Lowdon  came  to  Town  last  night :  I  purpose  to-morrow  to  visit  them,  hav 
ing  notice  of  their  lodgings.  1  recommend  you  to  the  Lord's  grace,  who  am 

Yours,  JA.  SHARP. 

London,  June  14th,  1GGO. 


00  AECHBISHOrS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANPRF^YS. 

8. 

Sir,— I  cannot  see  how  it  is  possible  for  mo  or  any  else  to  manage  the 
business  commitecl  to  me  by  your  Letters  of  the  other  week,  with  any  shadow 
of  advantage  ;  but  a  certain  prejudice  will  follow  upon  our  further  moving 
in  these  particulars,  which  were  so  disgustful  here.  I  am  baited  upon  all 
occasions  with  the  Act  of  the  West  Kirk  and  the  Declaration  at  Dumferm- 
ling.  It  cannot  be  believed  what  advantages  arc  thereby  taken,  both  by  our 
professed  adversaries  and  those  who  formerly  carried  as  friends.  As  to  the 
Protesters'  Meeting,  it  is  well  you  have  not  mingled  with  them  :  sure  they 
must  have  a  strange  daring  confidence,  that  they  offer  to  send  up  one  hither. 

1  cannot  say  they  will  have  welcome  ;  and  though  I  have  been  sparing  to 
speak  of  them,  finding  that  the  King  and  others  sufficiently  know  and  hate 
their  way,  yet  the  next  time  I  speak  witli  the  King,  I  will  give  them  one 
broadside.  '  Their  doom   is   (light,  unless   it   be  that  some  upon  design  of 
heightning  our  division,  to  break  our  Government,  do  give  them  any  coun 
tenance  ;  'which  I  am  not  apt  to  believe  will  be  done,  tho  I  hear  it  is  whis 
pered  by  some  Noblemen  here  that  it  were  lit  this  were  done.     I  had  it  from 
a  sure  hand,  that  the  other  week  Gillespie's  wife  came  to  the  Lord  Sinclair, 
and  having  Avept,  and  told  him  that  the  stream  against  her  husband  she  saw 
to  be  so  great,  as  he  would  lie  ruined,  desired  if  she  might  use  freedom  witli 
his  Lordship.    AVhen  he  had  bid  her  speak-  what  was  in  her  heart,  she  shew'd 
him  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Patrick  to  her,  bearing  that  she  might  deal  with  the 
Lord  Sinclair,  that  he  would  move  the  King  on  his  behalf,  and  know  what 
length  his  Majesty  would  have  him  to  go  as  to  the  bringing  in  Episcopacy 
into  Scotland,  and  give  all  assurance  that  he  would  do  the  King  service  to 
his  utmost ;  and  nothing  could  be  enjoyn'd  to  him  for  promoting  thereof, 
which  he  would  not  most  faithfully  and  vigorously  obey  and  perfect.     This 
Sinclair  hath  undertaken  to  move  (as  seeing  no  other  way  for  securing  of 
Patrick),  and  was  prompted  to  it  by  the  person  to  whom  he  communicated 
it,  Avho  yet  resolves  to  break  the  design  upon  that  account  by  another  way ; 
for  I  find  our  Noblemen  have  no  will  of  (iillespic's  coming  into  play,  know 
ing  his  domineering  humor.     For  anything  doth  yet  appear  to  me,  I  find  it 
is°well  that  you  have  not  come  up  at  this  time,  upon  several  respects.     I 
see  no  good  will  follow  upon  this  accommodation  they  are  upon  with  the 
Episcopal  party;  for  those  who  profess  the  Presbyterian  way,  resolve  to 
admit  of  moderate  Episcopacy,  and  the  managing  of  the  business  by  Papers 
will  undo  them.     The  Episcopal  men  will  catch  at  any  advantage  they  get 
by  their  concessions,  and  after  all  resolve  to  carry  on  their  own  way.    These 
motions  about  their  putting  in  writing  what  they  would  desire  in  point  of 
accommodation,  are  but  to  gain  time,  and  prevent  Petitionings,  and  smooth 
over  matters  till  the  Episcopal  men  be  more  strengthened.    I  find  that  there 
is  a  conjecture,  and  I  suspect  not  without  ground,  that  Midleton  shall  be 
Commissioner  to  the  Parliament.     It  is  resolved  the  Garrisons  will  not  be 
taken  off  before  the  next  summer.     The  Committee  of  Estates  will  sit  down 
and  make  work  for  the  Parliament,  which  will  be  called  soon  after.     The 
King  hath  declared  his  resolution  not  to  meddle  with  our  Church  Govern 
ment,  which  hath  quieted  the  clamourings  of  some  ranting  men  here,  as  if 
it  were  easy  to  set  up  Episcopacy  amongst  us. 

I  saw  this  day  a  Letter  from  an  intelligent  person  in  Paris,  bearing  that 
some  learned  men  of  the  Protestants  in  France,  and  of  the  Professors  of 
Leyden,  were  writing  for  the  lawfulness  of  Episcopacy;  and  if  the  King 


JAMES  SHARP.  01 

would  write  to  the  Provincial  Assembly  at  Cliarenton  iii  July  next,  there 
would  l>e  no  doubt  of  their  approving  his  purpose  to  settle  Episcopacy  in 
England.  I  find  our  Xoblemen  last  enough  against  Episcopacy  amongst  us, 
but  I  suspect  some  of  them  are  so  upon  a  State  interest  rather  than  con 
science  ;  and  all  incline  to  bring  our  Church  Government  to  a  subordination 
to  the  Civil  Power.  I  have  read  your  last,  about  the  Protesters'  Meeting, 
to  Crawfurd  and  Lauderdale.  It  is  not  probable  that  that  party  shall  have 
any  countenance  ;  sure  the  Committee  of  Estates  and  Parliament  will  exer 
cise  severity  towards  them.  I  would  gladly  come  oil',  but  1  fear  I  cannot 
get  away  these  10  dayes.  I  must  take  leave  of  the  King,  and  have  some 
time  to"  speak  with  him,  and  some  of  the  Grandees,  which  in  this  throng 
cannot  be  easily  done.  I  will  be  forced  to  draw  a  Bill  from  this  upon  my 
brother.  These  10  dayes  I  fear  I  shall  not  be  in  readiness  to  come  away, 
and  therefore  you  may  write  till  you  hear  from  me. 

J.  SHARP. 
4. 

Reverend  Sir, — Yours  of  the  28th  of  June  I  have  received.  I  did  write 
by  that  Saturday  Post  which  you  mention  did  not  come  to  hand  ;  every  week 
I'write  twice  at  least.  My  return  is  still  delayed,  though  1  press  it  from 
day  to  day,  because  the  King's  Letter,  which  lie  is  to  send  by  mo,  is  not  in 
readiness.  I  have  spoke  yesterday  with  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  this  day 
with  the  Manjuis  of  Ormond,  who  have  both  engaged  for  an  opportunity  for 
me  to  speak  with  the  King.  I  could  any  day  go  to  his  Majesty  and  get  a 
word  of  him  ;  but  to  have  that  time  and  privacy  which  is  fitting  for  my 
speaking  what  I  would  before  parting,  is  difficult  in  this  throng  of  applica 
tions  to  him.  The  next  week  I  am  hopeful  to  have  the  occasion,  and  there 
fore  I  must  have  patience  under  this  disappointment  as  to  the  speedy  return 
I  expected.  Since  my  last  by  the  Tuesday's  Post,  the  Ministers  have  had 
several  Meetings  at  Sion's  Colledge,  about  the  drawing  of  a  Paper  to  be 
presented  to  the  King,  bearing  three  concessions  in  the  matters  of  Church 
Government  and  Worship.  They  have  many  Debates,  and  though  all  who 
meet  are  not  of  one  mind,  yet  they  have  agreed  to  Episcopacy  moderated 
according  to  Bishop  Usher's  inducement,  to  Set  Forms  of  Prayer,  to  the 
former  Liturgy,  if  amended  by  such  Divines  as  shall  be  Nominated  for  that 
purpose.  They  desire  liberty  from  Ceremonies.  The  Paper,  it  is  said,  will 
be  in  readiness' this  night.  The  most  of  the  Episcopalians  proceed  to  impose 
their  way:  some  pretend  to  a  Moderation."  The  House  of  Commons,  having 
appointed  a  Committee  for  Religion,  do  now  and  then  start  some  motions 
about  the  Reports  of  that  Committee.  Some  yesterday  spoke  in  the  House 
for  Episcopacy ;  Mr.  Bamtield  offering  to  speak  against  it,  was  hissed  down 
by  the  clamours  of  others,  which  suits  not  with  the  Orders  of  the  House. 
Some  Lawyers  are  giving  Papers  to  the  Court,  proving  that  the  Bishops  of 
England  have  not  been  outed  by  Law  of  any  point  of  their  Jurisdiction,  save 
of  the  High  Commission  Courts.  The  cloud  upon  publick  affairs,  upon  this 
and  several  other  accounts,  is  become  more  dark  than  was  apprehended. 
The  Lord  Reigns,  and  knows  how  to  be  seen  in  His  glory,  and  to  appear  for 
His  own  interests.  To  His  grace  you  are  commended  by 

London,  July  7th.  Yours,  JA.  SHARP. 

POSTSCRIPT. — Sir  John  Clatwatby  told  me  that  he  expected  this  night 
three  Ministers  from  Ireland,  Mr.  Hart,  Richardson,  and  Kaies.  Their 
coming  is  verv  ill  relished  bv  the  Commissioners  from  the  Convention  who 


62  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDEEWS. 

arc  here,  who  have  Petitioned  that  Episcopacy  be  settled  there,  and  accord 
ingly  the  most  are  Nominated  hy  the  King;  Bramhal,  Primate  of  Armagh  ; 
Dr.  'Taylor,  Bishop  of  Down,  &c. 

5. 

Sir, I  am  exceedingly  impatient  of  the  delay  of  my  Dispatch.     Those 

who  should  draw  the  King's  Letter  arc  so  taken  up  with  English  business, 
that  I  cannot  get  them  to  set  about  this.  However,  I  have  a  toilsom  life  of 
it.  The  Lord's  anger  seems  not  yet  to  be  turned  away  from  these  Kingdoms. 
Affairs  here  begin  to  lie  much  involved  ;  many  forseeing  men  apprehend  a 
breach;  we  know  not  upon  what  foundation  to  stand.  The  Presbyterians 
are  like' to  be  grownd  betwixt  two  mill-stones  :  the  Papists  and  Plianaticks 
are  busv  at  work.  I  cannot  write  what  I  would,  but  lie  is  now  returned  who 
said,  God  make  all  well.  This  is  a  strange  people.  I  wish  our  countrymen 
were  at  home.  Argyle  this  day,  I  hear,  hath  come  to  Town,  and  some 
believe  he  will  not  find  kindly  \velcome.  The  King  is  baited  with  contrary 
applications  from  our  Countrymen,  as  if  they  were  two  Factions  driving  on 
the  old  divisive  work.  "We  must  look  on,  and  wait  what  the  Lord  will  do. 
It  is  promised,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  week  both  Scotland  and 
Ireland  shall  have  their  Answer  from  the  King.  The  Parliament  have  done 
nothing  as  to  the  publick  settlement  and  to  the  paying  of  the  Army  as  yet. 
July°7tli. 

G. 

Sir, — You  mention  not  the  receipt  of  mine  of  the  1-ith.     I  thought  his 

Majesty's   gracious   Ans\ver  would    be   acceptable   to  you;   and  albeit  it  be 

ready,  and  the  King  hath  approven  it  //;   tt'niiinix,  yet  I  am  advised  not  to 

take' it  till  it  be  Signetted,  Avhich  is  only  delayed  till  the  King  declare  the 

Secretary,  of  which  we  are  every  day  in  expectation;  and  then  1  hope  I  shall 

have  no  longer  stop.     It  was  told  here  !>  dayes  ago  by  the  Karl  of  Tweddale, 

that  Mr.  Stirling  had  disclaimed  lately  the  Remonstrance,  and  owned  the 

publick  Resolutions  :  it  seems  lie  begins  to  be  affraid  of  sklenting  of  bolts. 

For  me,  I  can  say  it,  I  have  not  been  accessory  to  anything  done,  or  to  be 

done,  against  the  Protesters,  further  than  to  the  justifying  of  our  cause,  and 

endeavouring  they  might  not  have  any  countenance  put  upon  them,  which  I 

am  free  to  profess  ;  and  when  I  heard  of  a  process  to  secure  some  Ministers 

among  them,  I  did  interpose  that  it  might  not  be  executed  at  present.    Their 

folly  is  so  manifest  to  all  now,  that  their  wonted  impudence  will  not  cloak 

it.     I  shall  mention  to  you  some  passages  of  my  discourse  with  the  King  at 

Breda.     He  asking  me  what  should  be  done  with  those  Remonstrators,  in 

my  answer  I  closed  with  this,  Though  it  be  not  lit  your  Majesty  give  them 

countenance,  or  put  power  into  their  hands,  yet  I  think  we  will  be  all  suiters 

to  your  Majesty  that  pity  and  pardon  may  be  their  measure.     The  King  with 

a  smile  reply'd  unto  me,  "Were  they  in  your  case,  they  would  not  allow  you 

such  a  measure.    "We  have  sufficiently  found  evidences  of  their  malice  against 

us  ;  I  pray  it  may  not  be  charged  upon  them.    Our  Noblemen  yesterday  paid 

their  thanks  to  his  Majesty  for  his  gracious  condescensions  to  their  humble 

desires,  and  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  week  such  as  may  get  off  will  be 

droping  away.     The  Countess  of  Crawford,  with  the  Earl  of  Haddingtoun, 

and  Ardross,  think  of  taking  journey  upon  Monday  ;  my  Lord  Crawford  will 

speedily  follow  after,  if  he  do  not  come  along.     It  is  a  great  trouble  to  me 

thus  to  be  detained,  could  I  tell  how  to  help  it. 

Yours,  J.  S. 


JAMES  SHARP.  03 


Reverend  Sir, — I  received  yours  of  the  5th.  I  have  communicated  your 
thoughts  upon  the  matter  of  accommodation  to  some  of  the  Brethren  here. 
They  have  some  sense  of  the  inconveniences  you  have  mentioned,  but  they 
excuse  themselves  from  the  present  necessity,  and  the  duty  they  owe  to  the 
peace  of  the  Church.  They  gave  in  their  Paper  upon  Wednesday  last  to  the 
King,  which  he  ordered  not  to  he  communicated  till  his  further  pleasure  be 
made  known.  This  hath  put  a  stop  to  my  obtaining  a  Copy  of  those  Con 
cessions,  which  yet  within  a  day  or  two  I  am  hopeful  to  procure,  and  shall 
send  it  to  you.  His  Majesty,  after  hearing  them  read  that  Paper,  did  com 
mend  it,  as  favouring  of  learning  and  moderation,  and  hoped  it  might  give  a 
beginning  to  a  good  settlement  of  the  Church.  He  said  he  would  hear  what 
the  Episcopal  men  would  offer,  and  before  he  proceeded  to  a  determination, 
he  would  acquaint  them.  They  told  me  they  were  intertained  with  fair 
smooth  expressions  from  his  Majesty  and  the  Lord  Chancellour,  the  Lord 
Chamberlain  and  the  Earl  of  St.  Albans  being  present.  "When  I  had  an 
account  of  the  contents  of  that  Paper,  I  asked  if  they  thought  it  consistent 
with  their  Covenant  engagements.  They  told  me  they  judged  so,  for  they 
had  only  yielded  to  a  constant  Presidency  and  a  reformed  Liturgy.  I  am  at 
the  writing  hereof  now  straitned,  that  by  this  I  cannot  give  you  a  larger 
account  of  those  passages  ;  but  for  any  thing  I  can  conjecture,  I  fear  they 
have  thereby  given  a  knife  to  cut  their  own  throats,  and  do  iind  that  the 
Episcopalians  prosecute  their  own  way.  This  morning,  his  Majesty  was 
pleased  to  call  me  into  his  closet  alone,  where  1  had  the  opportunity  to  give 
a  full  information  as  to  all  these  particulars  you  by  your  former  Letter  did 
desire  ;  and  I  must  say,  we  have  cause  to  bless  the  Lord  on  the  behalf  of  so 
gracious  a  King.  He  hath  ordered  a  Letter  to  be  written  within  a  day  or 
two,  which,  I  hope,  will  be  refreshing  to  all  honest  men.  After  this  he  will 
call  for  me  once  more,  and  then  order  my  return,  Avhich  I  do  passionately 
long  for,  were  it  the  Lord's  good  pleasure  to  take  me  oil'  this  toyl.  The 
Parliament  have  Voted  the  King's  Lands  to  be  restored  into  his  possession. 
It  is  thought  ere  long  the  Bishop  and  Dean  and  Chapter's  Lands  will  be  also 
restored.  There  are  several  complaints  of  the  ejection  of  many  good  Minis 
ters  throughout  the  Land,  and  the  re-admission  of  many  not  well  qualified, 
because  they  have  a  Legal  Title  to  their  Livings,  which  the  other  have  not. 
A  messenger  from  the  Sound  this  night  gives  certain  intelligence  of  a  Peace 
concluded  amongst  the  Protestant  Princes,  the  Swede,  Dane,  and  the  Brando- 
burger.  They  speak  of  an  Address  to  the  Prince  of  Conde  to  be  King  of 
Polland,  and  that  there  is  a  Piebcllioii  in  Rome  raised  against  the  Pope. 
This  afternoon  the  King  commanded  my  Lord  Lauderdale  to  go  to  the 
Tower,  and  examine  Lambert  about  the  Conferences  at  the  Lady  Hume's 
house  in  the  48th,  about  his  Correspondencies  with  Scotsmen  during  the 
time  of  the  Wars,  and  his  Intelligences  at  the  time  of  his  being  in  Newcastle 
this  winter ;  in  all  which,  Lauderdale  received  no  account  of  any  moment. 
His  Lordship  would  have  me  to  go  along  with  him  (but  I  was  not  present 
at  their  Conference),  and  paying  some  visits  in  the  City  hath  kept  me  so 
late,  that  I  must  break  off. 

I  am  yours,  JA.  SHARP. 

London,  July  14th,  1000. 

P.S. — We  hear  our  last  Letters  were  stopt. 


(j-i  ABCHBISHOPS  OE  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDREWS. 


Reverend  Sir, — Yours  of  the  l!Hh  I  received;  by  the  two  preceeding 
Posts  I  had  none  from  you.  That  my  Letters  to  you  came  not  sooner  to 
your  hand,  is  my  trouhle,  and  1  know  not  where  to  lay  the  blame,  but  1  am 
sure  to  scud  them  betimes  to  the  Post-house.  1  sent  you  the  last  week  some 
account  of  the  beads  of  that  Letter  which  his  Majesty  did  approve,  and  order 
to  be  written  for  his  Signing.  1  did  acquaint  my  Lord  Crawford  and  Cassils 
with  it,  and  I  know  not  if  by  them  onr  Countrymen  here  had  notice  of  it ; 
but  I  fear  many  of  them  are  not  satistied  with  his  Majesty's  declaring  his 
gracious  resolution  to  preserve  the  Government  of  our  Church  as  settled  by 
Law.  I  wait,  for  the  Sealing  of  my  Dispatch  with  the  Signet,  which  the 
King  hath  not  yet  put  into  the  hands  of  my  Lord  Lauderdale,  but  will  within 
few  days,  and  then  I  see  nothing  to  hinder  my  return  but  waiting  upon  my 
Lady  Ualcarras  her  coming  to  London,  according  to  your  desire;  after  which 
I  hope  1  shall  not  be  detained  above  a  day  or  two.  Upon  her  Lord's  account, 
that  Lady  deserves  this  testimony  of  our  respect  towards  her.  i  have  shown 
your  Letter  to  some  of  her  friends  here,  who  take  it  kindly  at  your  hands. 
Though  1  have  cause  to  be  very  impatient  to  have  my  return  thus  delayed, 
yet  some  of  our  friends  advise  that  I  put  off  two  or  three  dayes,  that  I  may 
take  care,  that  by  the  Instructions  to  the  Committee  of  Estates,  the  King's 
assurance  given  by  his  Letter  with  me  may  be  made  good.  Those  Instruc 
tions  will  probably  this  next  week  be  perfected,  so  that  1  begin  to  apprehend 
1  cannot  now  come  from  this  before  the  beginning  of  the  week  following. 
The  King's  condescension,  that  the  Acts  and  Authority  of  the  General 
Assemblies  at  St.  Andrews  and  Dundee  be  owned,  doth  take  in  the  Acts  of 
the  Commission  proceeding  it.  I'pon  my  motion  of  it  to  his  Majesty,  he 
was  satisfied  with  the  reasons  1  gave  from  his  own  concernments  and  ours, 
which  I  do  (the  more  I  think  of  it)  the  more  judge  to  lie  much  importanced 
by  it.  I  am  very  hopeful  that,  after  the  Parliament,  the  General  Assembly 
will  be  Indicted.  When  his  Majesty  hath  declared  who  shall  be  Secretary 
of  State,  I  shall  acquaint  him  with  the  Proclamation  you  sent  me,  which  I 
have  shown  to  some  of  our  friends,  who  think  it  may  do  well ;  but  not  hav 
ing  opportunity  to  table  it  as  I  would,  I  cannot  yet  give  you  an  account  of 
it.  Upon  Saturday  the  2-ith,  I  gave  you  an  account  (of 'which  you  do  not 
mention  the  receipt)  of  the  large  opportunity  I  had  with  his  Majesty  of  clear 
ing  you  from  mistakes  and  aspersions,  according  to  all  the  particulars  of  the 
information  you  sent  me.  1  may  say  it,  that  his  Majesty  and  others  arc 
convinced  that  the  exorbitances  chargeable  upon  the  Administrations  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland,  came  from  the  overbearing  sway  of  those  men,  whose 
way  hath  been  pernicious  to  our  Church  and  State.  And  shall  they  still 
presume  to  keep  Meetings,  and  persist  to  follow  what  is  good  in  their  own 
eyes,  as  if  there  were  no  King  in  Israel  \>  They  had  best  bethink  themselves, 
that  Cromwcl,  Lambert,  and  the  Yalingford  House  men  are  out  of  fashion; 
the  sun  and  shine  they  have  looked  big  under,  is  set.  We  have  heard  here 
of  an  indicted  Meeting  of  theirs.  I  believe  they  have  cause  to  suspect  their 
encouragement  from  Court ;  and  if  they  take  no  warning  in  time,  they  will 
draw  a  check  upon  themselves  which.will  not  be  pleasing.  I  cannot  imagine 
how  they  can  expect  you  will  join  with  them. 

I  believe,  ere  this  come  to  your  hand,  you  have  notice  of  his  Majesty's 
Answer  to  the  Paper  presented  by  our  Lords ;  by  which,  after  insinuation  of 
his  great  regard  to  Scotland,  he  tells  them  of  withdrawing  the  Field  Forces 


JAMES  SHAEP.  05 

presently,  and  of  the  Garrisons  as  soon  as  with  conveniency  may  be ;  of 
withdrawing  the  English  Forces  from  the  Castle  of  Edinburgh,  how  soon  a 
Scottish  Garrison  can  be  raised.  The  Committee  of  Estates  is  to  sit  down 
the  23d  of  August,  and  not  to  meddle  with  persons  or  Estates.  They  are  to 
fill  up  their  number  with  those  who  have  not  by  remonstrance  or  any  publick 
acting  disclaimed  the  King's  Authority.  The  Parliament  is  to  sit  the  2od  of 
October  following.  Our  Countrymen  are  desired  to  repair  home  at  their 
conveniency,  which  many  of  them  intend  to  do  this  next  week.  The  Pro 
clamation  for  the  Committee  of  Estates  is  a  preparing.  I  can  write  little  in 
reference  to  Church  matters  here,  but  that  I  see  the  proceedings  towards 
settling  Episcopacy  in  England  and  Ireland  do  go  011  apace.  The  Presby 
terians  and  their  favourers  neither  do  nor  can  take  any  effectual  way  to 
oppose  them.  I  find  they  will  speedily  Nominate  the  Bishops  of  England, 
as  they  have  already  Nominated  the  most  of  Ireland.  All  Deanries,  and 
Prebendaries,  and  Collegiate  Churches  are  lilled.  The  Brethren  from  Ire 
land  are  at  a  great  stand  what  to  do  :  the  General,  Manchester,  or  any 
person  of  interest,  refuse  to  introduce  them  to  the  King,  if  they  present  their 
Address.  They  have  write  to  the  Brethren  who  sent  them  how  they  find 
matters  stated.  By  what  I  can  learn,  1  find  the  most  they  can  expect  will 
be  a  forbearance  for  a  time  in  the  exercise  of  their  Ministry ;  but  it  will  not 
be  permitted  to  them  to  meet  in  Presbyteries  or  a  Synod.  I  give  them  all 
the  assistance  I  can,  though  they  get  nothing  of  it  from  the  City  Ministers. 
I  recommend  you  to  the  Lord's  grace,  who  am 

Yours,  JA.  SHARP. 

London,  July  20th. 

0. 

Reverend  Sir, — Yours  of  the  2d  I  received.  I  have  shewn  the  former 
part  of  it  to  my  Lady  Balcarras.  Lord  Laudcrdale,  and  Sir  Robert  Murray, 
who  take  it  very  kindly:  and  I  confess  I  sec  a  conveniency  for  testifying  our 
respect  to  that  noble  and  vertuous  lady,  which  I  have,  since  her  coming  to 
this  place,  endeavoured  to  evidence  amongst  my  acquaintance  here,  of  which 
she  is  sensible.  I  have  not  of  late  written  frequently  to  you,  because  my 
Negotiation  here  is  at  a  close,  and  I  have  been  in  daily  expectation  of  a 
Dimission  from  his  Majesty.  I  did  not  imagine  some  0  Aveeks  ago  my  stay 
would  have  been  so  long  continued,  and  yet  I  cannot  say  it  hath  been 
altogether  in  vain  ;  for  the  apprehensions  of  our  Countrymen  here  arc  much 
altered  within  this  month  from  what  they  were,  concerning  our  Church 
affairs.  After  his  Majesty  was  pleased  to  yield  to  what  I  humbly  offered,  by 
his  condescensions  in  that  Letter,  I  thought  it  was  not  amiss  to  acquaint 
some  here  with  it,  though  I  did  not  intend  a  divulging  of  it,  because  the 
signification  of  his  Majesty's  pleasure  might  silence  the  clamours  of  some, 
and  bring  them  to  be  more  moderate  in  their  expressions  about  the  Govern 
ment  of  our  Church;  which  I  find  hath  been  the  consequent  of  it,  and  there 
upon  am  the  less  troubled  that  the  contents  of  the  King's  Letter  are  noticed 
by  so  many.  The  Letter  was  this  day  by  Lauderdale's  hand  written  in 
nuoidn,  and  Subscrib'd  by  his  Lordship  as  Secretary,  and  offered  to  be  Super- 
scrib'd  this  night  by  the  King,  which  he  hath  done,  and  ordered  it  to  be 
Signeted  upon  Munday.  The  Letter  contains  the  heads  I  formerly  told  you, 
and  the  strain  of  it,  I  doubt  not,  will  give  abundant  satisfaction  to  satisfiable 
men,  as  you  write  ;  for  others,  I  believe  they  must  resolve  upon  more  ply- 
ableness  than  heretofore.  I  have  nothing  now  to  hinder  my  return,  which 

VOL.   II.  I 


Oil  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

I  desire  may  be  as  soon  as  can  be  wished,  for.  I  know  there  be  reasons  for 
my  hastning.  I  am  to  take  leave  of  the  King  upon  Munday  or  Tuesday, 
and  shall,  as  I  did  the  last  Munday,  acquaint  his  Majesty  with  what  you  had 
written  by  the  former  Post,  so  to  take  occasion  to  hint  at  what  you  have 
writ  by  tliis,  which  I  am  confident  will  be  acceptable.  He  expressed  satis 
faction  with  what  you  had  writ  then.  I  have  engaged  with  company  to 
enter  on  our  journey  upon  Thursday  next,  by  the  Lord's  help.  We  hear  the 
way  is  dangerous,  and  the  weather  so  excessively  hot  that  I  dare  not  venture 
to  Post,  and  therefore  must  wait  for  company,  and  make  as  speedy  a  journey 
as  we  can.  Tlie  Letter  of  the  Ministers  of  London,  in  return  to  yours,  is 
now,  after  much  belabouring.  Signed  by  them,  and  to  be  delivered  to  me 
to-morrow.  The  Episcopal  parly  are  still  increasing  in  number  and  con 
fidence  ;  some  think  they  fly  so  high,  as  they  will  undoc  their  own  interest. 
The  King  hath,  by  a  Letter 'to  the  House  of  Commons,  expressed  his  resolu 
tion  to  have  a  better  provision  of  maintenance  for  Vicarages  in  England, 
but  expresly  did  insinuate  the  owning  of  the  Church  Government  of  England 
by  Bishops  and  Archbishops.  The  Letter  is  now  Printed.  The  Bill  for 
securing  of  Ordained  Ministers  in  their  Livings  is  now  ready  to  be  Ingrossed 
in  the  House  of  Commons.  The  Bill  for  Indemnity  hath  past  the  House  of 
Lords,  and  this  day  was  sent  down  to  the  House  of  Commons;  but  it  is 
thought  the  two  ] louses  shall  not  agree  about  it,  which  will  prolong  the 
compleating  of  it  for  some  longer  time.  I  did,  according  to  your  desire, 
wait  upon  the  Lady  of  Argylo.  Many  of  our  Countreymen  take  journey  this 
next  week.  I  shall  by  the  Tuesday's  Post  write  once  more.  I  recommend 
you  to  the  Lord's  grace,  who  am 

Sir.  your^.  -T\.  SIIAIU\ 

London,  August  llth,  1000. 

IV. — A  clear  dixcoreri/  of  the  in<il!ei(nts  Fulxliooth  c<»t  tinned  in  <(  1'ajier,  Printed 
at  Loud/in,  intituled  "A  True  Helntimi  of  irlixt  in  diworered  concerniiui  the 
Murther  /if  the  Archly.  of  Si.  Andreir*.  «iul  of  irluit  (tjtjietir*  to  hare  been 
tlie  occttxioii  thereof."  A*  also  a  fnithj'ul  /nil  /<r/V/'  Xtirralire  <>t  tlie  xaid 
t'.eccrt'ilile  M^itrtlnr.  !>>/  Order-  <;/'///*  Jl/<(/V.s//V'.s  I'r'tnj  (.'nuneil. 

A  most  calumnious  and  scandalous  Paper  having  lately  been  Printed, 
intituled  "A  True  Relation  of  what  is  discovered  concerning  the  Murder  of 
the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  and  of  what  appears  to  have  been  the  occa 
sion  thereof,"  of  the  falshood  whereof  both  Printer  and  Author  appear  to 
have  been  sufficiently  convinced,  neither  of  them  daring  to  own  it  by  prefix 
ing  their  names  unto  it, — it  is  just  and  necessary,  for  vindicating  of  the 
truth,  and  for  doing  right  to  the  Martyr's  memory,  to  satisfie  the  world,  by 
a  clear  discovery  of  the  malicious  calumnies  and  falshoods  contained  therein, 
and  by  a  faithful  and  brief  Narrative  of  the  occasion  and  manner  of  that 
horrid  and  execrable  Murther.  In  order  to  which,  that  Paper  shall  be 
Reviewed  in  its  several  Paragraphs,  and  the  truth  manifested  by  the  most 
clear  and  authentick  evidences,  and  most  satisfying  proofs. 

Parafirii}>h  1. — "  One  Lovcl  of  Cunuchic,  being  Vassal  to  the  Bishoprick 
of  St.  Andrews,  the  late  Archbishop,  upon  the  account  of  some  Few-duties 
resting  to  him,  did  gift  to  his  own  behoof  the  Escheat  of  Lovel  of  Cunuchie, 
in  prejudice  of  his  numerous  family  and  many  creditors.  One  Haxtoun  of 
Rathiilet  being  one  of  these  creditors,  and  at  that  time  a  favourite  of  the 


JAMES  SHAKP.  67 

Archbishop's,  prevails  with  him,  upon  his  giving  Bond  to  the  Bishop  for 
WOOL  Scots,  or  therein',  to  assign  the  gift  in  his  favours.  Thereafter  the 
Archbishop  conceiving  prejudice  against  him,  Eegistrates  Ilaxtoun's  Bond, 
surprises  him  at  St.  Andrews ;  having  called  for  him,  takes  him  with  cap 
tion,  and  keeps  him  prisoner  in  St.  Andrews  for  several  months,  until  one 
Mr.  Falconer,  a  Conform  Minister,  obtains  his  liberty.  But  Ilaxtoun  having 
stronger  resentments  of  his  imprisonment  than  of  the  liberty  to  which  he 
was  restored,  at  his  liberation,  in  presence  of  witnesses,  Vowed  and  Swore 
God-danm-him  if  ever  he  went  to  Church  as  long  as  there  was  a  Bishop  in 
Scotland  ;  and  that,  if  he  lived,  he  should  be  revenged  on  the  Bishop's  per 
son.  This  Ilaxtoun  was  a  vile  person,  had  nothing  of  good  in  him,  and 
was  scarce  admitted  to  the  society  of  sober  men.  He  was  not  only  once  a 
favourite,  but  servant  of  the  Bishop,  having  collected  part  of  his  Kents." 

The  falshood  thereof  appears  manifestly  malicious,  in  so  far  as  Hax- 
stoun  of  Kathillet  was  so  far  from  having  been  cither  servant  or  favourite 
to  my  Lord  Archbishop,  that  he  was  a  man  altogether  unknown  to  his  Grace, 
in  so"  much  as  he  had  never  spoken  with  him  in  all  his  life  before  the  time 
he,  out  of  pure  charity  to  Lovcl  of  Cunuchie's  children  (whose  Tutor  this 
Haxstoun  was  left  by  the  father,  in  regard  of  his  near  relation),  made  a 
Transaction  and  Agreement  with  him  in  favours  of  the  said  children,  which 
Agreement  is  Dated  February,  1077.  And  so  favourable  and  charitable  was 
my  Lord  Primate  to  the  poor  children,  that  not  only  did  he  authori/.e  Hax 
stoun,  their  cousin,  to  manage  and  uplift  the  Bents  of  Cunuchie  (which  by  a 
Decreet  and  Sentence  of  the  Judges  were  due  to  his  Grace),  that  thereby  he 
might  have  opportunity  to  be  helpful  to  them,  but  gave  them  a  yearly  allow 
ance  for  their  subsistence  and  maintenance.  "\Vheii  Haxstoun  had  uplifted 
a  year's  Kent  thereof,  and  disposed  on  it,  he  was  so  far  from  being  rigid  to 
him,  that  he  condescended  to  take  his  Bond,  to  pay  at  the  expiring  of  three- 
quarters  of  a  year  what  was  presently  due.  The  time  of  payment  being 
come,  Haxstoun  still  delays  to  fulfil  his  obligation,  though  frequently  minded 
of  it  by  my  Lord's  Factor,  who,  finding  nothing  but  delays  and  shifts,  did 
Registrate  the  Bond  on  the  ninth  of  January,  1078.  And  on  the  twelfth  of 
March  thereafter,  while  the  Archbishop  was  in  Edinburgh,  and  without  his 
Grace's  knowledge,  Haxstoun  was,  by  a  Messengcr-at-Arms,  apprehended  in 
the  Town  of  St.  Andrews  ;  and  after  his  positive  declining  to  give  any 
manner  of  satisfaction,  was  committed  to  Prison  by  order  of  Law  :  of  which, 
when  the  Archbishop  had  notice,  he  would  not  have  given  way  to  it,  had  he 
not  been  credibly  informed  and  assured,  that  the  money  arising  by  the  sale 
of  the  corns  had  been  disposed  of  by  Kathillet  to  Kinloch,  and  made  use  of  by 
him,  for  buying  horses  and  arms,  for  his  keeping  of  rebellious  Field  Conven 
ticles.  Kathillet's  Agreement,  his  Intromission  and  stated  Accompt,  are  still 
extant  under  his  own  hand,  to  satisiie  any  who  desire  to  sec  them,  llax- 
stoun  having  continued  some  time  in  Prison,  Dr.  Falconer,  being  his  cousin- 
german,  mediated  his  liberation,  and  having  ingaged  for  the  sum  due  to 
the  Archbishop,  obtained  it ;  and  the  Doctor  declareth,  that  being  present 
at  his  enlargement,  he  heard  him  express  none  of  these  desperate  words 
above  mentioned,  either  as  to  his  deserting  the  Church,  nor  utter  any 
terrible  imprecations  to  be  avenged  on  the  Lord  Archbishop's  person.  This 
now  clearly  discovers  the  villany  and  malice  of  the  Author  of  this  infamous 
libel,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  business  of  Haxstoun  of  Kathillet,  and  the 
falshood  of  these  malicious  insinuations  suggested  by  him,  as  if  the  Lord 


08 


AUCI1B1SHOPS  01'  THE   SEE  OE  ST.  ANDKEWS. 


\rchbishop  had  been  au  oppressor  uf  orphans,  and  that  by  the  ^rigorous 
usage  of  the  former  he  had  provok'd  him  to  si  revenge  so  sacrilegious  and 
execrable. 

Pai-ftg.  2.—"  However,  now  the  Archbishop,  who  was  enemy  to  any 
thin"  that  had  interest  in  HaxsUmn,  commands  Captain  Carstairs,  Garret, 
and  one  Scarlet,  a  tinker,  to  apprehend  John  Balfour,  of  Kinlocb,  brother- 
in-law  to  the  said  llaxstoun  (no  Presbyterian,  though  an  enemy  to  the 
Bishop,  upon  the  injury  done  to  Ilaxtoun,  his  brother-in-law),  who  resisted 
the  said  Carstairs,  and  wounded  some  of  them  ;  and  thereupon  was  cited 
before  the  Council  (though  Carstairs  had  no  AVarrand  to  apprehend  him, 
only  to  gratify  the  Bishop),  where,  not  daring  to  appear,  he  is  denounced 
and  intercoinmuued,  and  made  a  stranger  to  his  own  house  for  two  years.  ' 

The  malice  and  faWiood  beivof  is  plain  and  manifest,  in  regard  that 
this  John  Balfour  of  Kinloch,  brother-in-law  to  the  said  llaxstoun  of 
Kathillei,  hath  for  these  last  seven  years  deserted  the  Church,  and  been  a 
noted  ringleader  of  Field  Conventicles,  and  ordinary  resetter  and  entertainer 
of  vagrant  incendiaries,  of  fugitive  and  intercommuned  persons,  Preachers 
and  others,  for  which  he  was  denounced  rebel,  and  intercommuned  long 
before  the  Archbishop  had  any  knowledge  of  or  dealing  with  llaxstoun,  his 
brother-in-law;  and  for  which  Captain  Carstairs  had  received  orders  from 
the  Privy  Council  to  apprehend  him,  as  he  had  to  seize  several  other  turbu 
lent  schismaticks  and  intercommuned  persons.  In  pursuance  whereof, 
Captain  Carstairs,  with  one  Mr.  Garret,  and  several  of  his  servants,  came 
to  the  house  of  this  Balfour,  to  seize  and  apprehend  him,  and  such  other 
turbulent  and  outlaw'd  persons  as  he  should  lind  therein.  Balfour  having 
intelligence  of  the  design,  did  remove  his  wife  and  children  out  of  the  house; 
and  when  Garret  and  two  others  comes  and  enters  the  outer  gate  of  Kinloch, 
they  are  saluted  with  eleven  shot  from  within,  and,  presently  retiring,  were 
bot'ly  pursued  hy  thirteen  or  fourteen  men  on  horseback,  with  naked  swords 
hanging  on  their  wrests,  and  eockt  pistnls  :  who,  having  given  eleven  cruel 
wounds' to  Mr.  Garret,  leaving  him  for  dead,  they  follow  hard  after  Captain 
Carstairs,  calling  to  him  that  he  would  yield,  and  render  himself  in  the  name 
of  God  and  of  the  Covenant,  wounding  him  in  the  face,  and  firing  many 
pistols  at  him  and  his  servants,  till  by  llight  they  made  their  escape  from 
their  fury.  And  here,  out  of  the  Depositions  taken  upon  Oath,  before  his 
Majestie's  Privy  Council,  and  yet  extant  in  the  Becords  thereof,  are  set  down 
the' names  of  those  bloody  zealots,  who  thus  resisted  the  King's  Authority, 
and  deforced  and  wounded  those  who  were  empowered  by  the  Privy  Council 
for  executing  the  Laws,  viz.,  John  Balfour,  of  Kinloch  ;  Hamilton,  of 

Kinkell ;  Andrew  Henderson,  son  to  .John  Henderson  in  Kilbrachmount ; 
Jaincs  Kussel,  in  Kings  Kettle  ;  Patrick  Miller,  in  Nether-Urquhart ;  John 
Henderson,  servant  to  the  said  Hamilton  of  Kinkell ;  John  Balfour, 

tenant  in  the  Lands  of  Lundie  ;  James  Beid,  in  Kettle  ;  John  Airthie, 
Thomas  Eairn,  James  Skinner,  all  these  three  in  Stramiglo  ;  James  Thom 
son,  in  Easter  Collessie  ;  Turnbul,  tenant  to  Broomball ;  Alexander 
Walker  and  Alexander  Cowper,  shoemakers  in  Leslie  ;  severals  whereof  are 
now  found  to  be  actors  and  parricides  in  committing  the  nefarious  Murther 
upon  the  Archbishop.  And  this  attempt  made  by  Captain  Carstairs,  and 
rebellious  deforcement  made  by  John  Balfour  of  Kinloch,  happened  on  the 
sixth  day  of  November,  1G77,  of  which  the  Archbishop  knew  nothing,  until 
Captain  Carstairs  sent  one  to  give  him  account  of  what  he  had  met  with  in 


JAMES  SHABP.  69 

the  executing  of  the  Council's  Orders  in  Fife,  juul  what  h;ul  so  contingently 
fallen  out,  mecrly  upon  an  information  the  Captain  had,  as  he  went  in  quest 
of  other  rebellious  and  intercommuncd  persons,  without  any  design  in  the 
Captain  at  that  time  to  have  seized  John  Balfour,  and  therefore  without  any 
intention  in  the  Archbishop,  much  less  command  to  apprehend  him.  From 
all  which  it  is  casie  to  observe  how  many  impudent  Forgeries  are  heaped 
together  in  this  particular,  relating  to  John  Balfour  of  Kinloch,  by  this 
malicious  Author  :  1.  That  the  Archbishop  should  have  enmity  against 
Balfour  of  Kinloch,  because  of  his  interest  in  Ilaxstouu,  and  from  that 
motive  should  have  commanded  Captain  Carstairs  to  apprehend  him ; 
whereas  the  Order  to  seize  Balfour  was  from  the  Privy  Council,  and  not 
from  the  Lord  Primate.  And  this  design  and  attempt  to  apprehend  him, 
being  made  in  the  sixth  of  November,  1077,  did  fall  out  four  months  before 
Haxstoun  was  imprisoned,  he  being  apprehended  with  caption  on  the  12  of 
March,  1078  ;  and  so  before  it  can  be  supposed  that  the  Archbishop  could 
have  any  malice  or  enmity  against  Balfour  of  Kinloch,  upon  the  account  of 
his  relation  to  Haxstoun  of  Kathillet.  2.  That  this  Balfour  should  be  no 
Presbyterian  ;  \vhereas  he  is  one  of  the  zealots  of  that  party,  and  greatest 
leaders  of  Field  Conventicles,  and  at  this  present  a  chief  Officer  or  Commander 
among  the  Bebcls  who  have  proclaimed  the  Covenant  at  Puitherglen.  8. 
That  one  Scarlet,  a,  tinker,  should  have  been  with  Captain  Carstairs  at  the 
encounter  with  Balfour ;  whereas  it  is  nottour  that  this  fellow  was  one  of 
Welch's  Guard,  and  would  neither  have  undertaken  nor  have  been  trusted 
in  any  such  enterprise  ;  and  is  now  in  Prison,  and  to  be  arraigned  for  this 
treasonable  crime  of  guarding  and  assisting  a  declared  traitor.  4.  That 
Carstairs  had  no  Warrand  to  apprehend  this  Balfour  ;  it  being  apparent  that 
he  had  an  express  Order  for  that  effect  from  the  Privy  Council.  5.  That 
this  Balfour  was  denounced  and  intcrcommuned  for  the  deforcement  of 
Carstairs  ;  whereas  he  was  declared  fugitive,  and  intercommuncd  several 
years  before  that  violence  was  committed. 

Pdniij.  3. — "Wherewith,  and  with  the  robbing  and  spoiling  committed 
by  Bailiff  Carmichael,  the  Secret  Council's  Sheriff-Depute  in  Fife,  the  said 
Haxstoun  and  Balfour,  being  inrag'd  and  infiamm'd  with  the  desire  of 
revenge  upon  the  Archbishop,  they  did  upon  the  third  of  May  instant,  with 
eight  or  nine  other  ruffians  (three  of  them  called,  as  they  say,  Balfours),  wait 
his  return  from  Edinburgh  to  St.  Andrews,  and  there  near  a  house  called 
Magus,  in  an  open  muir,  and  within  two  miles  or  thereby  of  St.  Andrews,  they 
pursue  him  ;  the  coachman  and  postilion  perceiving,  advertise  him,  and 
drive  with  all  their  might  to  escape,  so  that  for  near  three  quarters  of  a  mile 
they  could  not  overtake  them.  At  last  Balfour  and  Haxstoun,  being  better 
mounted  than  the  rest,  Balfour  comes  up  with  the  postilion,  commands  to 
stop,  and  he  refusing,  strikes  him  over  the  face  with  his  sword,  dismounts 
him,  and  disorders  the  coach  horses.  Haxstoun  comes  to  the  coach  and 
fires  several  pistols  at  the  Bishop  ;  but  none  of  them,  although  they  hit 
his  body,  did  pierce  him  ;  they  peirced  through  his  cloaths,  but  left  only 
blunt  marks  upon  his  body,  somewhat  like  to  burning. 

"  Whereupon  Haxstoun  drags  him  out  of  his  coach,  strikes  him  over 
the  left  eye  with  a  deep  wound,  who  thereupon  fell ;  and  gave  him  several 
other  mortal  stroaks  upon  his  head,  and  cuts  in  his  arms,  rifles  his  pockets 
and  his  daughter's  (who  was  with  him  in  the  coach)  of  their  gold  watches 
and  papers,  disarms  his  servants  without  hurting  any,  except  the  postilion, 


70 


AKCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDFtl^YS. 


who  was  wounded  ut  first :  and  that  liis  daughter  received  a  wound  on  her 
tlmml),  grasping  to  save  her  father — and  then  iiee  nil  together. 

'•  This  is  the  Account  both  of  the  persons,  the  occasion  of  their  wicked 
act,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  act  itself,  which  is  discovered  and  made 
known  l>y  the  examination  of  the  Bishop's  own  servants  upon  Oath,  and  a 
servant  of  the  house  near  the  place  where  the  fact  was  done,  where  Haxstoun 
and  Balfour  left  their  coats  before  they  attacked  the  Bishop,  and  after  it 
was  done  came  and  brought  them  away. 

••The  Bishop's  servants  depone,  that  a  man  mounted  on  a  bay  horse 
struck  the  postilion  and  turned  the  coach  :  and  that  lie  mounted  on  the  white, 
draped  the  Bishop  out  of  the  coach,  and  killed  him  with  bis  sword. 

--And  tin;  servant  in  the  house  depones,  that  it  was  John  Balfottr  of 
Kinloch  was  mounted  on  the  bay  horse,  and  Haxstoun  was  mounted  on  the 
white.  That  these  two  persons  had  a  personal  spite  and  hatred  at  the 
.Bishop  for  the  causes  before,  all  know,  and  the  'Records  witness.  That  the 
bullets  did  not  pierce  his  body  was  seen  by  the  Chyrurgcon,  William  Borth- 
wick,  who  was  sent  by  the  Council  to  view  his  body." 

As  for  the  robbing  and  spoiling  pretended  to  be  committed  by  Bailiff 
Carmichael,  the  Secret  Council's  Sheriff-Deput,  &c.,  it  is  sad  to  see  what 
shifts  malice  will  contrive,  to  justiiie  even  the  most  sacrilegious  and  bloody 
crimes,  it  being  a  strange  inference,  suppose  it  were  true,  that  Bailiff  Car 
michael  had  done  ill  tilings  in  Fife,  that  therefore  their  rage  against  him 
should  have  provoked  them  to  so  horrid  and  barbarous  a  Murther  of  any 
other  person.  2.  Bailiff  Carmichael,  being  deputed  by  the  Sheriff-Principal 
of  Fife  to  execute  the  Laws  against  Field  Conventicles  and  other  disorderly 
person  in  Fife,  did  neither  rob  nor  spoil,  but  proceeded  in  a  legal  and 
moderate  manner,  in  sentencing  and  fining  according  to  Law,  such  as  were 
cited  before  the  Sheriff-Court,  according  to  very  considerate  and  legal 
Instructions  he  had  received  from  the  Privy  Council  for  that  effect.  Nor 
doth  it  appear  that  any  of  the  bloody  murderers  of  the  Lord  Archbishop 
were  ever  so  much  as  cited  before  the  xiid  Depute,  much  less  iined  by  him; 
so  that  this  pretence  for  so  bloody  a  villany  is  altogether  vain,  groundless, 
and  frivolous. 

As  to  wliat  is  said  of  his  body  being  hit  with  several  shots  but  not 
pierced  thereby,  and  that  they  left  only  blunt  marks  somewhat  like  unto 
burning ;  whereby  the  Author  in  a  most  hellish  manner  insinuates  that  the 
body  of  this  Consecrated  person  was  hard  and  proof  of  shot,  and  whereby  he 
commits  a  more  villanous  murder  upon  the  fame  and  character  of  the 
Martyr,  than  the  bloody  assassines  did  upon  his  person  ;  the  falshood  of 
this  is  apparent  from  the  subscribed  testimony  of  a  Doctor  of  Medicine  and 
of  three  Chyrurgcoiis,  produced  before  the  Privy  Council,  and  still  extant  in 
the  hands  of  the  Clerks  thereof  (whereof  William  Borthwick  is  one,  and  the 
principal),  whereby  it  is  attested  and  declared,  that  among  his  many  other 
wounds,  that  he  received  one,  two  or  three  inches  below  the  right  clavicle,  in 
betwixt  the  second  and  third  rib,  by  a  shot. 

It  shall  be  unnecessary  to  say  any  more  of  the  other  manifest  and  bare 
faced  lies  contained  in  the  foresaid  Paper,  such  as  that  the  murderers  hurt  none 
of  his  servants  except  the  postilion  ;  whereas  the  best  armed  of  his  servants 
was  wounded  in  the  head  by  a  sword,  and  his  daughter,  besides  the  wound 
of  her  thumb,  had  another  111  her  thigh ;  and  that  they  dragg'd  him  out  of 
his  coach,  whereas  indeed  he  very  compos'dly  opened  the  door  of  the  coach 


JAMES  SHARP.  71 

himself,  and  with  meekness  and  resolution  stept  out,  and  went  forward  to 
the  murderers,  who  were,  with  so  grave  and  reverend  a  presence  and  resolu 
tion,  so  much  stunn'd  and  amazed  that  they  looked  upon  one  another,  and 
stood  a  little  while  like  men  confounded,  and  unresolved  what  to  do  ; — since 
enough  is  said  to  discover  this  infamous  libel  to  he  a  congestion  of  lies  and 
malicious  untruths  heaped  together,  upon  design  to  vindicate  the  fanatick 
party  and  keepers  of  Field  Conventicles  from  the  guilt  of  that  sacred  and 
innocent  hlood,  as  if  nothing  hut  private  picque  or  revenge  had  provoked 
the  barbarous  assassines  to  this  nefarious  Murder  ;  whereas  the  actors 
thereof  arc  all  known  to  have  been  Presbyterian  zealots,  bigot  fanaticks,  and 
constant  frequenters  of  Field  Conventicles,  and  are  now  in  arms,  and  some 
of  them  prime  Officers  and  Leaders  in  the  present  Rebellion  against  the  King 
and  the  Government  ;  which  insurrection  is  made  upon  design  to  overthrow 
the  Monarchy  and  the  present  Government  of  this  Church,  and  to  model 
both  according  to  the  Covenant. 

But  for  the  clear  and  full  satisfaction  of  the  world,  concerning  the  Lord 
Primate's  fair  and  equitable  transactions  with  Haxstoun  of  Rathillet,  and 
his  charitable  goodness  to  the  children  of  Lovel  of  Cunuchie,  together  with 
the  falshood  of  what  that  Author  alledgeth  concerning  the  motives  of 
Balfour  of  Kinloch,  provoking  him  to  commit  this  execrable  Assassination, 
I  shall  here  subjoyn  a  Missive  Letter  from  Mr.  David  Falconer,  Doctor  of 
Divinity,  and  Professor  thereof  in  the  University  of  St.  Andrews,  directed  to 
Sir  \Yilliam  Sharp,  of  Stonie-hill,  concerning  this  affair;  to  which  the  more 
credit  must  be  allowed,  in  regard  he  is  the  person  who  transacted  with  the 
Lord  Archbishop  for  the  money  due  to  him  by  Haxstoun,  and  is  cousin- 
german  both  to  him  and  Balfour  aforesaid. 

Sir, — The  Paper  you  sent  me,  under  the  Title  of  i(  A  true  Relation  of 
what  is  discovered  concerning  the  Murder  of  the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
and  of  what  appears  to  have  been  the  occasion  thereof,"  contains  so  many 
gross  and  notorious  lies,  Published  upon  the  most  malicious  design,  that  'tis 
no  wonder  you  are  greatly  troubled  thereat.  My  relation  to  Lovel  of 
Cunuchie  and  Haxstoun  of  Rathillet  being  the  nearest  save  that  of  a  brother, 
as  it  moved  my  Lord  Archbishop  to  make  me  privy  to  his  transactions  with 
both,  so  it  gives  you  a  just  ground  to  expect  from  me  a  faithful  and  true 
account  thereof,  which  I  do  impartially  give  you.  upon  certain  knowledge,  in 
the  following  Narrative. 

At  the  time  of  Lovel  of  Cunuchie  his  Decease,  a  considerable  sum,  vi/., 
betwixt  4  and  SOOO  merks,  was  owing  by  him  to  my  Lord  Archbishop,  for 
the  Few-duty  of  his  Lands,  that  for  many  years  had  not  been  paid  (my  Lord 
forbearing  him  in  his  life  time  out  of  pity,  because  of  his  incumbred  estate, 
and  out  of  a  personal  kindness  to  himself),  my  Lord  Archbishop  being  by 
Law  preferred  to  all  other  creditors,  was  to  have  the  Rent  of  the  Lands  ay 
and  while  he  should  be  paid,  and  thereof  gave  order  to  Cunuchie's  own 
servants  to  labour  and  sow  the  land  that  year  he  Died  as  formerly ;  after 
which  he  gave  a  gift  of  his  Escheat,  comprehending  the  corns  that  Avere  left 
after  the  seed,  with  the  cattc-l  and  whole  furniture  of  the  house  (which  might 
have  been  claimed  by  my  Lord,  though  he  had  been  no  creditor,  as  Superiour 
of  the  Lands),  to  a  confident  person,  who  was  to  have  made  money  of  them 
for  the  behoof  of  the  children.  This  donatar  of  the  Escheat  was,  by  my 
Lord's  order,  to  assign  his  gift  to  the  said  Haxstoun  of  Rathillet  (a  "man 
altogether  unknown  to  my  Lord,  and,  so  far  from  being  a  favourite  or 


72  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

servant,  that  lie  had  never  spoke  with  him  in  his  life  before  that  time),  he 
obliging  himself,  that,  after  payment  of  that   creditor,  at  whose  instance 
Lovel  of  Cunuchie  was  denounced  Rebel,  he  should  imploy  the  remainder  of 
what  money  he  could  make  thereof  for  the  relief  of  the  children.     The  truth 
of  this  can  be  made  appear,  to  any  that  will  desire  to  be  satisfied  therein, 
by  a  Paper  extant,  Signed  by  Rathillet's  own  hand;  and  that  Rathillet  did 
actually  dispose  of  these  goods,  and  uplift  the  money  and  prices  of  them, 
can  also  be  made  appear  by  a  stated  Accompt  of  his  intromission,  sign'd 
also  by  his  own  hand,  to  lie  shown  to  any  that  has  a  mind  bv  my  Lord's 
Factor.    The  reasons  why  this  Trust  was  given  to  Rathillet  were,  his  nearest 
relation  to  the  children,  his  being  nominated  their  Tutor  by  their  father,  his 
many  protestations  to  be  faithful  in  it.  and  importunity  upon  these  grounds 
to  have  it.     The  first  year's  cropt,  that  should  have  been  uplifted  for  my 
Lord's  payment,  was  sold  to  Haxstoun,  at  the  easiest  rate  of  the  Countrey, 
on  purpose  that  he.  taking  the  opportunity  of  selling  the  corns  at  the  best 
avail,  might  have  something,  after  the  price  that  was  to  be  payed  to  my 
Lord,  to  bestow  upon  the  children.     However,  all  that  my  Lord  received  for 
that    year's    Rent,   was    Rathillet's   Bond   for    between   eleven   and   twelve 
hundred  pounds  Scots,  to  be  paid  three-quarters  of  a  year  after  the  Term  at 
which  the  Rent  was  payable.    The  time  of  payment  being  come,  before  which 
Rathillet  had  sold  all  the  corns,  he  nevertheless  fulfilled  not  his  obligation, 
and,  giving  nothing  but  fair  excuses  for  what  was  past,  and  peremptory 
promises  of  speedy  payment  at  dyets,  which  he  always  deserted,  he  eluded 
execution  of  the  Law  for  near  four  months,  while  at  last  he  was  appre 
hended  by  a  messenger  in   St.   Andrews,  by  order  from  one  of  my  Lord's 
servants,  my  Lord  himself  knowing  nothing  thereof,  as  being  then  iit  Edin 
burgh.     All  that  day  he  was  kept  in  a  private  house,  and  offer  was  made  to 
him,  if  he  would  pay  presently  any  considerable  part  of  the  sum,  which,  as 
my  Lord's  Factor  averred,  he   faithfully  promised  he  should  have  brought 
with  him  the  day  before,  or  give  a    Precept  for  so  much  upon  any  honest, 
responsible  men,  who  had  bought  the  victual,  it  should  be  accepted  in  part  pav- 
ment,  and  discharged  accordingly,  he  himself  be  set  at  liberty,  and  a  further 
time  granted  him  for  the  payment  of  the  rest.     Roth  which 'he  shifted  and 
declined;  whereupon  at  night  he  was  committed  to  the  public  Prison,  where 
he  lay  for  some  time,  until  I  became  debitor  to  my  Lord  for  the  sum,  and  so 
procured  his  inlargement ;   at  which  time,  neither 'l,  nor  any  person  that  was 
with  him  at  his  coming  out  of  Prison,  heard  any  thing\>f  the  desperate 
resolution,  either  to  desert  the  Church  or  be  avenged  on  the  Archbishop's 
person,  alledgcd  (by  the  Author  of  the  Paper)  to  have  been  expressed  by  him, 
with  a  terrible  imprecation,  before  witnesses.     After  this,  my  Lord  hearing 
of  the  straitned  condition  of  the  children,  ordered,  by  his  Precept,  the  tenant 
of  Cunuchie  to  deliver  for  the  children's  use  twenty  bolls  of  victual,  and 
thereafter  Signed  a  Paper  with  the  other  creditors,  some  of  whom  he  moved 
to  condescend  thereto,  and  to  all  whom  he  gave  the  example,  being  the  first 
subscriber  for  a  yearly  allowance  to  them. 

By  what  hath  been  said,  the  falshood  of  that  Paper,  and  the  malice  of 
its  Author,  is  clearly  discovered,  as  to  that  part  of  it  which  relates  to 
Haxstoun,  and  how  groundless  the  insinuations  are  of  the  Archbishop's 
uncharitable  oppression  of  Cunuchie's  family,  or  creditors,  his  rigorous 
usage  of  Haxstoun,  and  provoking  of  him  thereby  to  so  execrable  a  revenue 
by  that  horrid  Murder. 

As  to  what  is  reported  in  the  Paper  of  John  Balfour  of  Kinloch,  brother- 


JAMES  SHARP.  73 

in-law  to  the  said  Haxstoun  of  Eatliillet,  that  ho  is  no  Presbyterian,  though 
an  enemy  to  the  Bishop  upon  the  injury  done  to  Haxstoun,  Balfour  himself, 
and  all  that  have  conversed  with  him  these  seven  years,  will  disprove  it,  he 
having  deserted  the  Church  and  followed  after  Field  Conventicles  all  that 
time,  and  glorying  to  he  reputed  one  of  the  most  furious  zealots  and  stoutest 
champions  of  the  phanatick  party  in  Fife  ;  for  which  he  was  denounced  and 
intercommuned  long  before  my  Lord  had  any  knowledge  of  or  intermeddling 
with  Haxstoun,  his  brother-in-law;  and  for  which.  Captain  Carstairs  had 
received  orders  from  the  Privy  Council  to  apprehend  the  said  Balfour.  In 
pursuance  whereof.  Captain  Carstairs,  with  his  servants,  and  one  Garret,  an 
Englishman  (for  Scarlet,  the  tinker,  known  since  to  be  one  of  Welch's 
Guard,  as  he  would  never  have  assisted  Captain  Carstairs  in  any  attempt 
against  any  of  that  gang,  so  was  he  never  reported  or  suspected  by  any  of 
this  Countrcy  to  have  been  one  of  their  number),  coming  one  day  near  by  his 
house,  resolved  to  make  search  for  him  there,  it  being  known  he  was  no 
stranger  to  it,  as  is  alledged.  lie  was  found  with  a  company  of  armed  men 
feasting  in  his  house,  and  upon  Garret's  alighting,  fired  his  pistol  upon  him, 
and  thereafter  breaking  out  of  the  house,  overtook  him  before  he  could  reach 
his  horse,  knockt  him  down  with  their  swords,  and  left  him  not,  while  by 
many  fearful  deadly  wounds  they  thought  they  had  murthered  him,  and 
then  pursued  Captain  Carstairs  most  furiously,  while  being  desperate  of 
getting  the  like  done  with  him.  though  they  fired  frequently  at  him,  they 
retired.  It  is  to  bo  observed  of  this  scuffle,  that  it  happened  some  four 
months  before  liathillet's  imprisonment,  and  consequently  before  it  can  be 
supposed  Balfour  should  have  suffered  any  thing  from  the  Archbishop  on  the 
account  of  his  brother-in-law  Haxstoun.  And  farther,  that  besides  Balfour 
of  Kinloch,  there  were  others  said  to  be  present  there,  who  arc  found  to  have 
been  with  him  also  at  the  Archbishop's  Murder. 

For  what  is  further  said  to  have  been  the  occasion  of  the  execrable 
Murder,  vi/.,  "the  robbing  and  spoiling  committed  by  Baillie  Carmichacl," 
I  leave  it  to  all  sober  men  to  consider,  whether  the  executing  the  Laws  of 
the  Land  by  a  person,  cloathed  with  Commission  from  his  Majestie's  Privy 
Council,  and  the  Principal  Sheriff  of  the  Shire,  conform  to  their  instructions, 
and  a  Warrand  under  his  Majestie's  own  hand,  deserves  these  epithets. 
Only  this  I  must  say,  that  it  can  be  proved  that  my  Lord  Archbishop  had, 
out  of  his  own  mouth,  ordered  the  Sheriff-Deputes  to  suspend  the  execution 
of  their  sentence  in  poinding  or  distraining  of  goods,  six  dayes  before  his 
Murder. 

As  for  what  concerns  the  Murder  itself,  and  the  inhumane  and  barbar 
ous  manner  thereof,  I  hope  you  arc  sufficiently  inabled  to  expose  the  defects 
and  falshoods  of  this  pretended  true  Piclation,  by  the  full  information  you 
have  thereof  from  my  Lord's  own  daughter  and  his  principal  servants,  who, 
to  their  inexpressible  grief,  were  forced  to  be  eye-witnesses  thereof.  This 
Account  I  cheerfully  give  you,  for  your  satisfaction,  or  whatever  use  you 
please,  providing  it  be  accepted  as  a  part  of  the  duty  that  is  and  ever  will  be 
owing  to  the  blessed  memory  of  my  dear  Lord,  by 

Your  most  humble  servant,  D.  FALCONER. 

As  for  the  manner  of  this  horrid  and  execrable  Murder,  the  following 
Account,  attested  before  famous  Witnesses  (by  my  Lord's  own  daughter  and 
his  servants,  who  had  the  misfortune  to  be  helpless  but  sorrowful  spectators 

VOL.  II.  K 


74  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

and  eye-witnesses  of  this  barbarous  cruelty),  will,  I  hope,  prove  very  accept 
able  and  satisfactory  to  the  world,  and  ji  sullicient  refutation  of  all  false 
Relations  and  Narratives  concerning  it  that  have  already  been  spread  abroad, 
or  may  hereafter  appear  in  Writing  or  Print. 


On  the  third  of  May,  a  day  remarkable  in  the  Church  Calendar  for  the 
invention  (if  the  Holy  Cross,  this  excellent  Prelate  found  his,  and  I  hope 
obtained  his  Crown  ;  'in  which  month,  also,  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France,  and 
Cardinal  P>eaton,  one  of  his  Predecessors,  were  assassinated.  About  nine  of 
the  clock  in  the  morning,  he  took  his  coach  in  Keimoway,  a  Village  ten 
miles  distant  from  St.  Andrews,  where  lie  lay  the  night  before,  accompanied 
only  with  four  of  hi-  own  servants,  and  his  eldest  daughter  in  the  coach  with 
him.  About  hah'  an  hour  before  lie  was  attack'!:  (his  great  soul,  it_  seems, 
presaging  what  came  to  pass),  he  fell  on  a  most  serious  and  pious  discourse 
to  his  daughter,  giving  her  such  pious,  instructions  and  directions  as  he 
would  have  done  if  upon  his  doath-b<  d  ;  whcreunto  she  gave  such  becoming 
and  satisfactory  answers,  that  he  imbraeed  and  formally  blessed  her.  After- 
Avard,  coming  near  to  a  farmer's  house,  called  Magus,  he  said,  There  lives  an 
ill-natured  man  ;  Clod  preserve  us,  my  child.  Within  a  very  little  time  after, 
the  coachman  perceiving  some  horsemen  on  the  spur  after  them,  calls  to  the 
postilion  to  drive  on,  for  those  men  had  no  good  in  their  minds.  My  Lord 
finding  the  coach  run  so  hard,  look't  out  to  see  what  the  matter  Avas,  and 
then  perceiving  armed  men  pursuing,  he,  turning  to  his  daughter,  said,  Lord 
have  mercy  upon  me,  my  poor  child,  for  I  am  gone  ;  upon  Avhich  presently 
three  or  four  of  the  rui'iians  tired  at  the  coach,  but  touched  neither  of  them 
in  the  coach.  The  coachman  put  the  fast'T  on.  and  outrun  the  most  part  of 
the  rogues  tmy  Lord's  own  servants,  of  Avhieh  the  best  armed  Avas  wounded 
in  the  head  by  a  sword,  being  mounted  on  Aveak  hackney  horses,  had  fallen 
behind  before  tins,  and  Avere  disarmed  at  the  first  coming  up) ;  Avhile  at  last 
one  of  the  best  mounted  over-lived  the  postilion,  and  by  wounding  him  on 
the  face,  shooting  the  coach-horse  Avhich  he  led  in  the  back,  and  cutting  him 
in  the  hams,  turned  the  coach  out  of  the  Avay,  and  gave  the  rest  the  advan 
tage  to  come  up.  Then  they  tired  again  :  one  of  them  had  his  pistol  so  near 
my  Lord,  that  the  burning  calting  was  left  on  his  gown,  and  Avas  rubbed  otf 
by  his  daughter,  Avhich  Avounded  him  two  or  three  inches  beloAV  the  right 
clavicle,  in  betAvixt  the  second  and  third  rib  ;  and  then  another  of  them,  on 
the  other  side  of  the  coach,  run  him  upon  the  region  of  the  kidneys  with  a 
small  SAVord.  Thereafter  they  called,  Come  out,  cruel,  bloody  traitor;  but 
not  any  offered  to  lay  hands  upon  or  drag  him  out  of  his  coach,  as  is  falsly 
reported  in  the  relation,  the  assassines  being  all  yet  on  horseback ;  whcre- 
upon  most  composedly  he  opened  the  door  of  the  coach  himself  and  stept 
out,  and  then  said,  Gentlemen,  you  will  spare  my  life,  and  whatever  else 
you  please  to  do,  ye  shall  never  be  questioned  for  it.  They  told  him  there 
Avas  no  mercy  for  a  Judas,  an  enemy  and  traitor  to  the  cause  of  Christ. 
Well  then,  said  he,  I  shall  expect  none  from  you,  but  promise  to  me  to  spare 
my  poor  child — directing  his  speech  to  one  Avhom  it  is  suspected,  by  his  look 
ing  him  broad  in  the  face,  he  knew,  and  reaching  forth  his  hand  to  him,  the 
bloody  villain  starts  back  from  my  Lord,  and  by  a  mighty  bloAV  cut  him 


JAMES  SHARP.  75 

more  than  half  through  the  wrest.  Then  said  my  Lord,  I  hope  ye  will  give 
me  some  time  to  pour  out  my  soul  to  God,  and  I  shall  pray  for  you  ;  and 
presently  falling  on  his  knees,  he  said,  Lord  forgive  them,  for  I  do  :  Lord 
receive  my  spirit.  While  thus  praying  on  his  knees  (one  of  the  traitors 
standing  some  paces  oil  called  to  the  rest,  Spare  those  gray  hairs),  and  his 
hands  lifted  up,  they  struck  furiously  at  them,  and  wounded  him  therein  in 
three  places,  which  nevertheless  lie  kept  up  hlecding  to  Heaven  :  while  one 
of  them  cut  him  to  the  very  hone,  a  little  ahove  the  left  eye.  Whereupon 
my  Lord  said,  Now  you  have  done  the  turn  ;  then  falling  forward,  lie 
stretched  himself  out,  and  laid  his  head  on  his  arm,  as  if  he  had  been  to 
compose  himself  for  sleep,  when  some  of  the  villains  from  their  horses,  and 
others  afoot  (having  alighted),  gave  him  about  fifteen  or  sixteen  wounds 
in  the  head;  and  in  effect,  the  whole  occipitial  part  was  but  one  wound. 
After  which,  they  rimed  his  pockets  and  took  some  Papers  out  of  them  :  and 
so  mad  was  their  spite  and  rage,  that  even  after  he  was  dead,  and  the 
murderers  gone  some  way  from  the  body,  one  of  the  furious  and  bloody 
assassincs  returned,  and  thrust  twice  or  thrice  at  him  with  a  sword.  They 
robbed  his  daughter  of  some  gold  and  other  things  she  had  in  a  little  box — 
(they  had  wounded  her  thrusting  at  her  father,  betwixt  whom  and  them  she 
had  interposed  herself,  by  a  stab  in  her  thigh,  and  one  of  her  thumbs) — then 
they  took  away  my  Lord's  iiight-bag,  ."Bible,  girdle,  and  some  Papers  of 
moment.  They  also  robbed  his  servants,  and  took  their  arms  from  them, 
and  then  went  away  as  they  came  ;  and  encountered  one  of  my  Lord's 
gentlemen,  he  had  sent  off  some  time  before  to  salute  the  Earl  of  Crawford 
in  his  name,  having  passed  near  to  his  house.  One  of  them  called  to  kill 
him,  for  he  was  one  of  Judas'  servants;  others  came  and  toolc  his  Papers  in 
his  fore-pockets,  and  arms,  and  bid  him  be  gone,  for  his  nuttier  was  gone 
home  before  him.  The  place  where  this  horrid  Murder  was  committed  is  called 
Magus  Moor,  within  two  miles  and  in  sight  of  the  Town  of  St.  Andrews. 

Thus  fell  that  excellent  Prelate  (whose  character  and  worthy  acts 
deserve,  and  no  doubt  will  find  some  excellent  pen),  by  the  hands  of  nine 
fanatick  ruffians.  That  they  were  so  is  not  to  be  doubted,  their  names  being 
all  now  known,  and  all  of  them  denounced  or  intcrcommuncd  for  frequenting 
Field  Conventicles,  and  the  known  champions  of  that  party  in  the  Shire  of 
Fife  ;  besides,  their  holy  sanctified  discourse  at  the  time  of  their  bloody 
actings  shews  what  temper  and  spirit  they  were  of.  I  have  done  with  my 
relation  (attested  to  me  before  famous  Witnesses,  by  my  Lord's  daughter, 
and  those  of  his  servants  that  were  so  unfortunate  as  to  be  spectators  of  this 
execrable  villany),  when  I  have  observed  how  ridiculous  the  Author  of  the 
pretended  true  one  is,  where  he  indeavours  to  discover  the  occasion  of  the 
Murder  of  the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews  ;  for  what  need  was  there  of  any 
thing  more  to  provoke  them,  than  his  being  an  Archbishop,  and  the  Primate 
of  Scotland  ;  and  the  most  active  as  well  as  the  most  Picvcrcnd  Father  of 
this  Church  ?  Was  it  not  for  this  reason  that  he  was,  on  the  streets  of 
Edinburgh,  shot  at  by  Mr.  James  Mitchell,  while  in  his  own  coach  '?  Was 
not  this  the  reason  that  these  fanatick  Books  from  Holland,  both  sometime 
ago  and  of  late,  marked  out  his  Sacnim  Cajntt,  as  they  termed  it,  and  devoted 
him  to  a  cruel  death,  and  gave  out  predictions  that  he  should  die  so  '? 
Which  they  easily  might,  being  so  active  in  stimulating  and  prompting 
instruments  to  fulfil  their  own  prophecies. — "  0  Lord,  how  unsearchable  are 
thy  judgments,  and  thy  ways  past  finding  out." 


76  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDREWS. 


May  it  please1  your  Grace, — The  Archbishop  oi  St.  Andrews,  Primate  of 
this  your  Majesty's  ancient  Kingdom,  one  of  your  Majesty's  Privy  Council, 
having  been  yesterday  assassinated  upon  your  Majesty's  highway  at  noon 
tide,  by  ten  or  eleven  fanatick  rufiians,  baro  and  open  faced,  by  .so  many 
wounds  as  left  one  of  many  instances  of  their  unparalell'd  cruelty,  most  of 
his  wounds  having  been  given  after  he  was  visibly  dead, — we  could  not  but 
acquaint  your  Sacred  Majesty  by  this  Express,  by  which  your  Majesty 
may  easily  consider  whether  we  have  been  needlessly  jealous  of  the 
cruelty  of  that  Sect,  that  is  by  our  enemies  said  to  be  so  unnecessarily 
persecuted  by  u-, ;  and  by  which,  and  the  many  late  murders  committed 
upon  your  Souldiers  and  others  for  doing  you  service,  your  Majesty 
and  we  may  certainly  conclude  these  of  that  profession  will  be  unsati- 
ablc,  till  by  crimes  and  cruelties  they  do  all  that  in  them  lies  to  force 
your  Majesty  from  your  Royal  (iovenmient.  This  being  the  natural 
product  not  of  their  humors  but  of  their  principles,  out  of  which  these 
flames  will  undoubtedly  at  last  ari-c,  that  will  consume  even  those  Avho 
accuse  the  necessary  zeal  of  your  servants,  as  illegal  oppressing  of  tender 
consciences,  albeit  we  never  straitned  the  liberty  of  any  Religion,  save 
that  which  dissolved  the  principles  of  humane  society  and  unhinged  your 
Majesty's  Royal  Covcnum  nt  ;  nor  can  we  omit  upon  this  occasion  to  inform 
your  Majesty  that  this  assassination  has  been  revived  by  a  Paper  lately  spread 
here,  whereby  the  just  Ex<  cul  ion  of  Mr.  James  Miteheh  who  Died  for  attempt 
ing  formerly  the  same  crime,  is  charged  upon  your  Ministers  and  Judges  as 
also  illegal  murder  as  dial  which  he  designed  to  commit,  though  he  Died 
inveighing  to  the  greatest  height  of  bitterness  against  your  Majesty  in  his 
last  speech.  Anil  therefore  we  humbly  beg  that  your  Majesty  would  enquire 
into  the  authors,  spreaders,  and  abettors  of  that  villanous  and  treacherous 
Paper,  and  would  send  them  (if  of  this  Kingdom)  hither,  to  be  judged  here; 
or  (if  subjects  of  your  Majesty's  other  Kingdoms)  that  your  Majesty  may,  for 
the  security  of  your  own  Crown,  and  the  just  vindication  of  your  Judicatures, 
and  the  incouragement  of  others  to  serve  you,  require  your  respective  Judges 
to  bring  them  to  condign  punishment,  as  we  would  do  to  such  as  defame 
their  Judicatures  amongst  us.  The  Proclamation,  herewith  sent  will  inform 
your  Majesty  of  the  outmost  endeavours  that  we  could  use  upon  this  dread 
ful  occasion ;  and  we  hope  that  your  Majesty,  who  takes  such  effectual 
means  to  punish  the  murder  of  one  of  the  meanest  servants  of  your  Laws  in 
England,  will  use  all  endeavours  to  punish  the  murderers  of  one  of  your 
Majesty's  chief  Ministers  here,  whose  affection  to  your  Royal  interest  has' 
occasioned  his  being  brought  to  this  fatal  period. 

We  are, 

Your  Majesty's  most  humble,  most  faithful,  and  most  obedient  Sub 
jects  and  Servants.  Si/b*cril>iliir  ul  wlrntnt.  Chancellor,  Glas 
gow-,  Douglass,  Montrose,  Mar,  Glencairii,  Murray,  Wigtoun, 
Linlithgow,  Edinburgh,  Elphinstoun,  President  of  Session, 
Edinburgh,  Depute,  Register,  Advocate,  Collingtoun,  General 
Dalzell,  Abbots-hall,  Rossie ;  Mr.  Maitland,  Lundy,  Tarbet. 
Edinb.,  4th  May,  1679. 


JAMES  SHAHP.  77 

VII.- 


May  it  please  your  Grace, — Upon  notice  oi'  the  horrid  assassination 
committed  yesterday,  upon  the  person  of  the  Lord  Archbishop  of  St. 
Andrews,  the  Council  being  frequently  met  this  day,  have  by  a  Letter 
acquainted  his  Majesty  therewith,  and  sent  a  Copy  of  the  Proclamation  past 
on  this  occasion  to  your  Grace,  with  a  Copy  of  the  Depositions  of  the  Lord 
Archbishop's  servants,  taken  by  the  Council,  to  be  offered  to  his  Majesty. 
In  time  of  the  sitting  of  Council,  no\v  at  seven  hours  at  night,  the  Justice- 
General  and  Laird  of  Lundy  having  returned  from  Fyfe,  gave  us  a  new 
account  of  that  bloody  tragedy,  and  that  some  of  the  Forces  have  overtaken 
two  suspect  persons ;  and  having  resisted,  one  of  them  was  shot  in  the  back 
and  taken  prisoner,  who  is  found  to  be  young  Inchdearny,  and  it  is  thought 
will  die  in  his  wounds.  And  another,  Henry  Scliaw,  in  Kirkcaldy,  an  inter- 
communed  person,  was  also  then  taken.  The  Council  has  appointed  their 
next  meeting  to-morrow,  in  the  forenoon.  The  inclosed  Copy  of  a  Declara 
tion  was  dropt  in  Cowper  some  few  days  before  the  Murder. 

Your  Grace's  most  humble  servant. 
Ldinb.,  1th  Mav,  1U70. 


Charles,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  Great  Britain,  France,  and 
Ireland,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  to  our  Lyon  King-at-Arms,  and  his  brethren 
Hcraulds,  Maccrs,  or  Mcsscngers-at-Arms,  our  Sheriffs  in  that  part,  con- 
junctly  and  severally,  specially  constitute,  greeting.  "We  being  fully  and  by 
legal  proofs  assured  of  the  late  horrid  and  bloody  Murder  committed  upon 
Saturday  last,  being  the  third  day  of  May  instant,  by  ten  or  eleven  fanatick 
assassinates  upon  the  person  of  the  most  l!evercnd  Father  in  God,  James, 
late  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  Primate  of  all  Scotland,  which  barbarous 
and  inhumane  Assassination  and  Parricide  will,  we  doubt  not,  spread  horrour 
and  amazmcnt  in  all  the  hearts  of  such  as  believe  that  there  is  a  God  or  a 
Christian  Religion  :  a  cruelty  exceeding  the  barbarity  of  Pagans  and  Heathens, 
amongst  whom  the  Officers  and  Ministers  of  Religion  arc  reputed  to  be 
Sacred,  and  arc1,  by  the  respect  born  to  the  Deity,  which  they  adore,  secured 
against  all  such  bloody  and  execrable  attempts:  a  cruelty  exceeding  the 
belief  of  all  true  Protestants,  whose  Churches  have  justly  stigmatized  with 
the  marks  of  impiety  all  such  as  defile  with  blood  those  hands  which  they 
ought  to  hold  up  to  Heaven :  and  a  cruelty  equal  to  any  with  which  we  can 
reproach  the  enemies  of  this  true  and  Reformed  Church.  By  which  also  not 
only  the  principles  of  humane  society,  but  our  Authority  and  Government 
(the  said  Archbishop  being  one  of  our  Privy  Council)  is  highly  violated,  and 
example  and  encouragement  given  for  murdering  all  such  as  serve  us  faith 
fully,  according  to  the  prescript  of  our  Laws  and  Royal  commands  :  daily 
instances  whereof  we  arc  to  expect  whilst  Field  Conventicles,  those  rende- 
vouzes  of  Piebellion  and  forges  of  all  bloody  and  Jesuitical  principles,  are  so 
frequented  and  followed,  to  the  scandal  of  all  Government  and  the  contempt 
of  our  Laws.  And  which  Murder  is,  as  far  as  is  possible,  rendred  yet  more 
detestable  by  the  umnask'd  boldness  of  such  as  durst  openly  with  bare  faces, 
in  the  midst  of  our  Kingdom,  at  mid-day,  assemble  themselves  together  to 


78  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

kill  in  our  highway  the  Primate  of  our  Kingdom,  and  one  of  our  Privy 
Council,  by  so  many  stroaks  and  shots  as  left  his  body  as  it  were  but  one 
wound,  and  many  of  which  being  given  after  they  knew  he  was  dead,  were 
remarkable   proofs   they  were   acted   by  a   spirit   of  hellish   and   insatiable 
crucltv.     AVe  have  therefore,  with  advice  of  our  Privy  Council,  thought  lit 
hereby  to  command  and  charge  all  Sheriffs,  Stewarts,  P>aillies  of  Regalities, 
and  Bailliaries.  and  their  Deputes,  Magistrates  of  Burghs,  and  Officers  of  our 
Standing  Forces,  to  search,  seek,  take,  and  apprehend  the.  persons  guilty  of 
the  saicfhorrid  Murder,  or  any  suspect  by  them,  and  to  imprison  them  until 
thcv  be  brought  to  justice  :   and  all  our  good  and  faithful  subjects  to  concur 
in  the  taking  and 'securing,  as  far  as  is  in  their  power,  these  assassinates. 
And  in  respect  there  is  a  company  of  vagrant  and  seulking  ruffians,  who,  to 
the  great  contempt  of  all  Government,  do  ride  thorow  this  Kingdom,  killing 
our 'Souldiers,  deforcing  such  as  put  our  Law,,  in  execution,  and  commit 
ting   such   horrible  murders,  who   might   be  easily   discovered,  if  all  such 
among-,!   whom   they  converse   did.   according  to  their  duty,  endeavour  to 
apprehend  them,  or  give  notice  whereof  they  haunt  or  resort.     A\  e  have 
therefore  thought  tit,  conform  to  the  1-11  Act,  Par.  l"2,  K.  James  (5th,  to 
command  and  charge  all  our  subjects,  that  whensoever  any  unknown  men  or 
vagabonds   shall  repair   amongst  them,  that  they  with   all  possible  speed 
certify  any  of  our  Privy  Council,  Officers  of  our  Forces,  or  any  having  trust 
under  us  thereof;  with  certification  to  them,  that  if  they  omit  the  same  they 
shall  be   punished  with   all  rigour,  conform  to   the  said  Act.  _  And   since 
several  of  the  said  assassinates  arc  known  to  have  been  tenants  in  the  Shire 
of  Fife,  whose  faces  will  bo  known  to  such  of  the  witnesses  as  were  present, 
we  hereby  require  and  command  all  the  Herctors  and  Masters  of  the  said 
Shire  of  Fife  and  Kinross  to  bring  their  tenants,  cotters,  and  servants,  and 
others  dwelling  in  their  Lands,  to  the  respective  Towns  at  the  civets  after- 
mentioned,  vi/..  those  within  the  Presbytery  of  St.  Andrews,  to  the  Town  of 
St.  Andrews,  upon  the  13th  day  of  May  instant ;  those  within  the  Presbytery 
of  Cowpcr,  to  the  Town  of  Cowper,  upon  the  10th  day  of  the  said  month; 
those  within  the  Presbytery  of  Kirkcaldy,  to  the  Town  of  Kirkcaldy,  upon 
the  10th  day  of  the  said  month  ;   and  those  within  the  Presbytery  of  Dun- 
fermling,  to"  the  Town  of  Dunfermling,  upon  the  2:-)d  day  of  the  said  month, 
at  Ten  a  Clock  in  the  forenoon,  upon  each  one  of  the  saids  dayes,  there  to 
continue  and  abide  till  they  be  examined  by  the  Sheriff-Deputes  of  the  said 
Shire,  who  are  hereby  Commissionatc  to  that  effect,  and  to  be  seen  by  the 
saids  witnesses ;    with  certification  to   such   of  the  saids  tenants,  cotters, 
servants,  and  others  aforesaid,  as  shall  be  absent,  they  shall  be  reputed  as 
accessory  to  the  said  crime ;  and  the  Masters,  if  they  produce  them  not,  or 
if  hereafter  they  harbour  any  that  shall  not  compear,  they  shall  be  reputed 
favourers  of  the  said  Assassination.     And  whereas  there  are  some  persons 
under  caption  or  intercommuning  in  the  said  Shire  for  several  causes,  and 
lest  persons  who  are  innocent  of  that  horrid  crime  may  be  thereby  debarred 
from  appearing  and  vindicating  themselves,  we  have  thought  fit  hereby  to 
sist  and  supersede  all  execution  upon  any  Letters  of  caption  or  iutcrcom- 
muning,  or  any  other  AVarrant  for  securing  of  any  persons  for  any  cause,  for 
the  space  of  fourty-eight  hours,  before  and  after  the  saids  dyets  of  appear 
ance,  that  they  may  safely  come  and  go  without  any  troiible  or  impediment 
whatsoever.     And  to  the  end  the  said  cruel  Murder  may  be  the  more  easily 
discovered,  we  do  hereby  offer,  and  give  full  assurance  of  our  indemnity,  to 


JAMES  SHARP.  79 

any  one  of  the  saicls  assassinates  who  shall  discover  his  complices,  and  such 
as  hounded  them  out,  and  of  present  payment  the  sum  of  ten  thousand 
merles,  to  any  who  shall  inform  who  were  the  saids  assassinates,  if  upon  his 
information  they  or  either  of  them  can  be  apprehended,  that  they  may  he 
brought  to  condign  punishment.  And  ordains  these  Presents  to  be  Printed 
and  Published  at  the  Mercat  Cross  of  Edinburgh,  and  at  the  Mercat  Crosses 
of  all  the  Royal  Burghs  in  the  Shires  of  Fife  and  Kinross,  and  to  be  read  at 
all  the  Paroch  Kirks  of  the  said  Shires,  and  Jurisdictions  within  the  same, 
upon  Sunday  next,  being  the  eleventh  of  this  instant,  immediately  after  the 
ordinary  time  of  Divine  Service  in  the  forenoon,  that  the  same  may  come  to 
the  knowledge  of  all  persons  concerned.  —  (liven  under  our  Signet  at  Edin 
burgh,  the  fourth  day  of  May,  1071),  and  of  our  Pieign  the  thirty-one  year. 

ALEXANDER  Giusox,  Cl.  !>li.  Condi  ii. 

VIII.  —  Another  Letter  f  row  the  I' 


May  it  please  your  most  Sacred  Majesty,  —  By  a  flying  Packet  this  day 
we  had  the  honour  of  your  Majesty's  Commands,  in  order  to  our  procedure 
against  the  execrable  murderers  of  the  late  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  to 
Avhich  we  shall  pay  most  careful  raid  exact  obedience,  and  are  now  preparing 
the  best  expedients  for  that  effect. 

"We  have  already  ordered  the  Lords  of  Justiciary  to  proceed  against  some 
of  the  ringleaders  in  the  late  liebellion,  who  have  accordingly  sentenced 
two  of  the  incendiary  Preachers  therein,  viz.,  Mr.  King  and  Mr/Kidd,  to  be 
Executed  as  traitors,  on  the  fourteenth  of  August  next,  at  the  Cross  of  Edin 
burgh  ;  and  we  shall  be  careful  to  require  them  to  go  on  to  the  tryals  of  the 
other  Heretors,  Preachers,  or  ringleaders  who  were  ingaged  in  the  lute 
liebellion,  and  are  already  in  custody,  and  such  others  in  their  circumstances 
as  shall  be  apprehended  hereafter.  For  this  purpose  we  have  appointed  a 
Committee  to  prepare  the  best  methods  to  be  offered  to  us  for  giving  the 
more  exact  and  speedy  obedience  to  your  1'oyal  Commands  hereancnf,  and 
we  shall  in  every  thing  endeavour  with  our  utmost  ambition  to  approve 
ourselves, 

May  it  please  your  most  sacred  Majesty, 

Your  Majesty's  most  humble,  most  obedient,  and  most  faithful 
Subjects  and  Servants,  liothes,  Chancellor  ;  Dowglas,  Mon- 
trose,  Marshall,  Marr,  Murray,  Airlie,  Ahoyne,  Dundonald, 
Kintore,  Edinburgh,  Elphingstoun,  James  Foulis,  Abbotshal, 
Mery,  Mr.  Maitland,  Lundy. 
Edinb.,  last  July,  1079. 

IX.  —  A  Letter  fnnn  the  /'/•//•//  C'onnril  to  the  ]hil,e  of  Lainlertlale  cmicerniin/ 

the  same. 

May  it  please  your  Grace,  —  Having  perused  his  Majesty's  Letter  of  the 
2Gth  instant,  and  your  Grace's  sent  therewith,  we  thought  fit  immediately 
to  make  the  inclosed  lie  turn  to  his  Majesty,  of  which  we  have  sent  a  Copy. 
By  your  Grace's  Letter  we  have  an  account  that  a  great  many  of  the  Eebels 
are  taken  in  several  places  in  Ireland,  and  that  his  Majesty  has  ordered  them 
to  be  sent  prisoners  to  this  Kingdom,  with  direction  that  timeous  notice  may 


80  AECHBISIIOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

be  sent  to  us  for  sending  a  sufficient  guard  to  receive  them  at  their  landing, 
to  he  brought  to  secure  Prisons.  And  having  considered  of  the  fittest  place 
for  landing  such  prisoners  from  Ireland,  we  conceive  they  may  he  most 
securely  landed  at  Greenock.  or  Newport-Glasgow,  in  the  mouth  of  Clyde. 
And  we  desire  Advertisement  to  be  given  thereof  to  such  as  have  the  custody 
of  these  prisoners  in  Ireland,  that  they  may  be  landed  there,  where  they 
shall  be  received  by  a  sufficient  guard,  and  secured  until  his  Majesty 
declare  his  pleasure  anent  them. — Signed  in  Name  and  by  Warrant  of  his 
Majesty's  Privy  Council,  by 

Your  Grace's  most  humble  servant, 
Edinb.,  last  July,  lG7'->.  ROTUKS,  Chancellor,  F,  P,  I). 


X. — A  Proclamation  against  iJic  ^lurtliercru  t if  tin'  late  Arclibislwp  of  St. 


and  appointing  MaijistrateK  and  (  ouncih  »f  Biin/Jis  I!<\i/nl  to 


Charles,  by  the  grace  of  God.  King  of  Great  Britain,  France,  and  Ire 
land,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  io  our  Lovits,  lleraulds,  Macers,  Pursevants, 
or  Messengers-at-Arms,  our  Sheriffs  in  that  part,  conjunctly  and  severally, 
specially  constitute,  greeting  :  We,  taking  to  our  consideration  how  much  the 
Protestant  Religion  and  the  honour  of  this  our  ancient  Kingdom  are  stained 
by  that  barbarous  and  horrid  Assassination  and  Murder  of  the  late  Arch 
bishop  of  St.  Andrews — whereof  we  have  by  several  Proclamations  expressed 
our  abhorrency,  and  prohibited  the  reset  of  these  murderers,  Avhom  we  have 
exempted  from  our  late  gracious  Pardon  and  Indemnity;  and  albeit  it  was 
the  duty,  not  only  of  those  in  authority  under  us,  but  of  all  our  subjects,  to 
use  their  endeavours  for  discovering  and  bringing  to  justice  these  execrable 
persons,  enemies  to  all  humane  society ;— yet  we  understand  that  these 
murtherers,  and  likewise  diverse  Heretors  and  Ministers,  who  were  ingagcd 
in  the  late  Rebellion,  and  are  exceptcd  from  our  Indemnity,  have~been 
harboured  and  reset  in  some  places  of  this  Kingdom,  to  the  great  reproach 
of  the  Nation  and  contempt  of  our  Authority  and  Laws.  Therefore,  we, 
with  advice  of  our  Privy  Council,  do  command  and  charge  all  Sheriffs, 
Stewards,  Baillies  of  Regalities,  and  Bailliaries,  and  their  Deputes,  Magis 
trates  of  Burghs,  and  others  in  authority  under  us,  to  search  for,  seek,  take, 
and  apprehend  the  persons  after  named,  viz.,  John  Balfour,  of  Kinloch  ; 
David  Haxstoun.  of  Rathillet ;  George  Balfour,  in  Gilstoun  ;  James  Russell, 
in  Kettle;  Robert  Dingwal,  a  tenent's  son,  in  Caddam  ;  Andrew  Guillane, 
webster  in  Balmerinoch  ;  Alexander  and  Andrew  Hendersons,  sons  to  John 
Henderson,  in  Kilbrachmont :  and  "George  Flecming,  son  to  George  Fleem- 
ing,  in  Balbuthy— who  did  perpetrate  and  commit  the  said  horrid  Murder ; 
and  also  any  Heretors  and  Ministers  who  were  in  the  late  Rebellion,  and 
any  persons  who  have  reset  and  harboured  these  Murderers  and  Rebels, 
wherever  they  can  be  found,  within  the  bounds  of  their  respective  Jurisdic 
tions,  and  put  them  in  sure  Ward  and  Firmance  until  they  be  brought  to 
justice.  And  in  case  these  persons  fly  out  of  the  Shire,  that 'they  give  notice 
thereof  to  the  Sheriff,  or  other  Magistrate  of  the  next  Shire  or  Jurisdiction, 
that  they  may  in  like  manner  search  for,  apprehend,  and  secure  them  until 


-This  George  Fleeming  was  a  few  voars  ai,0  livin£f  at  jj01K|()11(  an(j  professiiK 
physick,  and  may  be  still  alive  there. 


JAMES  SHARP.  81 

they  be  brought  to  justice,  with  power  to  the  Sheriffs  and  other  Magistrates 
aforesaid,  if  they  shall  find  cause,  to  call  to  their  assistance  our  subjects 
within  their  Jurisdiction,  or  such  a  number  of  them  as  they  shall  think  fit, 
who  are  hereby  required  to  concur  with,  and  assist  them,  under  all  highest 
pain  and  charge.  And  we  expect  that  the  Sheriffs  and  other  Magistrates 
aforesaid,  will  use  exact  diligence  in  the  Premisses,  as  they  will  be  answer 
able  on  their  highest  peril.  And  seeing,  by  the  Fifth  Act  of  the  Second 
Session,  and  the  Second  Act  of  the  Third  Session  of  our  First  Parliament, 
the  Magistrates  and  Councils  of  Burghs  are  ordained,  at  and  before  their 
admissions  to  the  exercise  of  their  Offices,  to  Sign  the  Declaration  appointed 
to  be  Signed  by  all  persons  in  publick  trust,  under  the  Certifications  therein 
exprest.  Therefore,  we,  with  advice  aforesaid,  do  command  and  require 
the  Magistrates  and  Council  of  the  respective  Burghs  of  this  Kingdom,  who 
shall  be  chosen  at  the  next  ensuing  Elections,  to  Sign  the  foresaid  Declara 
tion,  as  is  prescribed  in  the  saids  Acts,  and  to  return  the  Declarations  so  Signed 
by  them  to  the  Clerks  of  our  Privy  Council,  betwixt  and  the  third  Thursday 
of  November  next,  certifying  such  as  shall  not  give  obedience,  that  they  shall 
be  proceeded  against  and  censured,  conform  to  the  said  Acts  of  Parliament. 
Our  will  is  hereforc,  and  we  charge  you  strictly  and  command,  that  incon 
tinent  these  our  Letters  seen,  ye  pass  to  the  Mercat  Cross  of  Edinburgh,  and 
remaneiit  Mercat  Crosses  of  the  head  Burghs  of  the  several  Shires  of  this 
Kingdom,  and  other  places  needful,  and  there,  by  open  Proclamation,  make 
Publication  of  the  Premisses,  that  none  may  pretend  ignorance  of  the  same. 
And  we  ordain  these  Presents  to  be  Printed.  —  Given  under  our  Signet  at 
Edinburgh  the  twentieth  day  of  September,  107'.),  and  of  our  Reign  the 
thirty-one  year. 

"WILLIAM  PATKRSON,  CL  Sli. 


The  Registers  of  the  Privy  Council  being  in  some  disorder,  the  other 
Papers  relating  to  Archbishop  Sharp's  Murther  could  not  be  got. 


At  one  time  it  was  my  purpose  to  incorporate  herewith— 

1.  The  Letters  which  passed  between  Principal  Baillie  (Born 
in  the  Saltmarket  of  Glasgow)  and  the  Archbishop,  Edited  by 
Dr.  David  Laing,  who  sways  with  Wodrow. 

2.  The  Lauderdalc  Papers,  collated  by  my  kind  Correspon 
dent,  George  Yore  Irving,  Esq.,  5  St.  Mark's  Crescent,  Regent's 
Park  Road,  London. 

3.  The  Letters  between  the  Archbishop  and  Robert  Douglas, 
the  Originals  of  which  were  in  Wodrow's  possession,  and  which 
are  Printed  in  the  Introduction  to  his  History,  Burns'  Edition. 
Transcripts  of  these  are  in  the  Library  of  Glasgow  College,  B  Y. 
G.  3.,  pp.  214,  thin  4to. 

VOL.  II.  L 


82  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Excepting  the  mutilations,  noticed  in  the  "  True  and  Im 
partial  Account,"  etc.,  as  also  hy  Lyon  and  Stephen  in  their 
Histories,  it  must  he  owned  that  the  Letters  No.  3  are,  upon 
the  whole,  "true  Copies."  Hence,  it  is  unnecessary  to  reprint 
what  have  heen  so  largely  circulated  in  what  AVodrow  terms  his 
"  History  of  the  Suffering  Church  of  Scotland."  AYodrow's  bent 
of  mind  towards  "  Prelacy,"  and  all  connected  therewith,  is  un- 
mistakcable,  and  the  purpose  for  which  he  brings  out  his  treasures 
is  undisguised  ;  but  those  who  have  unprejudicedly  weighed  the 
YVrits  of  our  Prelate,  are  now  inclined  not  to  take  for  granted 
what  Scotch  Presbyterians  have  for  centuries  handed  down,  but 
to  turn  the  balance  the  other  way,  opining  that  the  Letters  which 
have  been  preserved  are  not  "  full  of  cunning  and  diplomacy," 
but  honest,  open,  and  manly.  They  evidence  that  the  Minister 
of  Crail  laboured  hard  to  prop  up  a  hopeless  cause,  and  that  he 
only  parted  with  it  when  it  became  untenable. 

I. CONTEXTS  OF  PAPKP.S  IN   Tin:    EPISCOPAL    CIIKST  OF   DIUWKT:*  AT    TRINITY 

CoLT.KOK,     Cil.KNAI.MONl),     PKRTI1SIIIKK. 

The  "Episcopal  Clicst"  is  a  tall  box  or  bureau  (not  very  pretty),  some 
eight  feet  high,  opening  by  a  door  the  whole  length  in  front.  The  Contents 
are  arranged  in  fifteen  open  shelves,  which  draw  out.  All  are  in  excellent 
dry  condition,  and  pretty  complete.  They  have  been  at  one  time  arranged 
chronologically,  so  that  there  is  the  common  difficulty  of  a  double  notation. 
The  Chest  contains  a  great  many  Official  Documents  and  Correspondence, 
and  was  last  in  rotation  in  the  custody  of  the  late  Primus  William  Skinner, 
from  whose  care  it  passed  to  its  present  place  of  rest.  It  contains  Records 
of  all  the  Xonjuror  Consecrations,  with  the  Episcopal  Seals  appended.  Of 
a  later  Date  are  two  interesting  Deeds,  viz.,  the  Original  Agreement  with 
Bishop  Seabury,  Nov.  17,  178  J,  and  the  Signatures  agreed  to  at  Laurence- 
kirk,  Oct.  14,  1801,  beginning  with  the  name  of  John  Skinner,  Primus,  and 
continued  by  later  Signatures  on  the  same  Parchment,  the  last  three  names 
being  David  Wilson  (the  present  Dean  of  Aberdeen),  Arthur  Rankcn 
(the  present  Synod  Clerk),  and  John  Taylor,  Deacon.  The  latter  became 
somewhat  notorious.  He  was  for  many  years  Incumbent  of  Cumineston, 
Aberdeenshire.  A  Correspondence  between  Bishop  Skinner  and  him  was 
got  out  of  his  hands  by  Sir  William  Dunbar,  of  S.  Paul's,  Aberdeen,  who 
gave  it  to  Messrs.  Charles  Popham  Miles,  M.D.,  of  S.  Judo's,  Glasgow,  and 
David  Thomas  Kcrr  Drummond,  of  S.  Thomas',  Edinburgh,  who  Published 
it,  animadverting  on  Bishop  Skinner  for  the  style  of  "Dear  John,"  "Dear 


JAMES  SHABP.  83 

Taylor,"  "  Yours  us  you  merit,"  ••  Yours  us  you  demean  yourself,"  in  con 
nection  with  "your  mulish  obstinacy"  in  refusing  to  read  the  Baronet's 
Sentence  of  Excommunication.  Ere  this,  Taylor  had  imbibed  the  Ratioual- 
ism  of  a  Rev.  Alex.  Allan,  Episcopal  Minister  at  Monymusk,  who  Preached 
a  Sermon  full  of  "German  Neology"  in  the  Chapel  of  Inverurie.  Taylor 
was  tried  before  a  Diocesan  Synod,  and  Suspended. 

From  boyhood  he  was  eccentric,  and  went  under  the  soubriquet  of 
••Pheasant."  There  was  a  famous  apple  tree  in  his  father's  garden,  upon 
which  youths  of  the  Town  were  wont  in  season  to  make  furtive  attacks  ;  and, 
to  make  the  path  to  '-Pheasant's"  fruit  more  convenient,  he  placed  an  old 
harrow  against  the  tree,  as  a  step-ladder  to  ascend,  at  the  top  of  which  Avas 
nailed  the  poetic  warning,  in  Banffshire  Doric — 

••  Steal  an  apple,  steal  a  pin. 
Steal  a  cmv.  ere  a'  lie  deen. " 

John  was  often  the  butt  of  burlesque  while  at  King's  College,  Aberdeen. 
His  fellow-students  tied  him  into  an  arm  chair,  while  they  lathered  and 
tonsured  him  a  In  iiuidc,  and  then  set  him  at  large.  During  the  College 
vacation  he  occasionally  taught  the  School  kept  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Murdoch, 
Keith,  where  he  had  to  endure  all  sorts  of  tricky  annoyances  from  the 
disciples.  As  a  penance  to  defaulters,  they  were  made  to  stand  in  couples 
in  the  large  lire-place,  with  their  heads  up  the  sooty  vent. 

Latterly  he  resided  in  his  native  Town  of  Keith,  in  great  poverty. 
While  on  a  visit  to  Huntly,  he  Died  suddenly  of  indigestion,  and  was  Buried 
beside  his  relatives,  at  the  west  side  of  the  old  Belfry-gable  of  the  Church  of 
Ruthvcn,  where  a  Head-stone  sets  forth  his  natural  endowments.  He  was 
meek,  peculiar,  and  insufficient.  The  poor  creature  had  a  hobby  about 
Missionary  and  Bible  Societies,  and  made  a  Will,  leaving  of  his  penury 
some  few  shillings,  as  a  mark  of  respect. 

The  Matrices  of  the  J','///.sro/^/  Smls,  formerly  kept  in  the  Chest,  are  now 
deposited  in  the  Antiquarian.  Museum,  Edinburgh,  Cuts  and  Descriptions  of 
which  arc  to  be  found  at  their  proper  places  in  this  Book. 

The  Papers  arc  copied  from  a  Folio  Catalogue  in  the  hand-writing  of 
the  Rev.  Piobcrt  Forbes,  of  Date  1758,  pp.  01,  and  arc  "taken  out  from 
among  those  of  Archbishop  Sharp  by  some  of  his  Grace's  friends,  and 
delivered  to  the  Plight  llcv.  Bishop  Keith."  They  are  as  follow : — 

Xinnln'r  l.sV. 

1.  (Original)  Lauderdaill  to  Mr.  James  Sharp,  Min1'  of  the  Gospell  at 
Craill,  Deci\  2d,  1GGO,  whereby  it  appears  that  Mr.  Sharp  was  then  a  man 
of  consequence. 

2.  (Original)  Lauderdaill,  Jaiiry.  24th,  1601.    For  my  Revd.  and  worthie 
friend,  Mr.  James  Sharp,  his  Majestie's  Chaplain  in  his  Kingdom  of  Scot 
land,  thanking  him  for  his  Sermon  before  the  Parliament,  and  desires  a 
Printed  Copy  of  it  for  the  King,  and  one  at  least  for  himself. 

3.  (Original)  Lauderdaill,  August  26th,  1661.    For  the  Right  Revel.  Dr. 


si  AiiCllJ.5IhjJ.iOPS  OE  THE  biiE  OE  ST.  A:\DKEYvb. 

James  Sharp,  lleeior  of  tlio  Umvcrsilie  of  'it.  Andrews,  wherein  L;uulerd;ull, 
so  fiirr  from  having  Corresponded  with  ircton,  as  calumniated,  tliat  lie  had 
never  scon  ircton  till  he  saw  him  hanging  on  tlie  gallowes  at  Tyburn. 

-I.  (Origin;1!)  Archbishop  Sharp,  Novr.  20ih,  KK55,  to  the  Earl  of  Kin- 
cardine,  in  answer  to  two  J'roni  his  Lordship  about  his  countenancing,  tho  a 
Privy  Counsellor,  disorderly  and  schmismaiical  3-ieei in gs,  Ac.  Herein  is 
asserted  the  Divine  Eight  of  Episcopacy,  which  was  believed  (says  the  Arch 
bishop)  l»y  Iving  diaries  the  2nd.  ;ind  his  1'ayr  and  grandfather.  [Very  long; 
Printed  in  i'iill  in  Stephen's  Life  and  Times  of  Sharp,  p.  oil).] 

ii.  (Original)  Lauderdaill.  Janry.  iJOih.  j(ilii).  Eor  my  Lord  Archbishop 
of  St.  Andrews,  his  Grace,  in  which  a  promise  no  Bishop  to  be  oli'ercd  hy 
Lauderdaill  to  any  Yaccancy  but  whom  Archbishop  Sharp  shall  first  recom 
mend. 

0.  (Original)  Lauderdaill,  Oetor.  1.  KJI57.  Eor  his  Grace  my  Lord 
Archbishop  of  bt.  Andrews.  Primate  and  Metropolitan  of  all  Scotland; 
herein  it  is  plain,  J5ps.  of  Scotbind  melt  without  Presbyters,  to  deliberate 
about  and  order  Church  mati 

7.  (Original)  Lauderdaill.   July  18,   1GG8,  to  Archbishop  Sharp,  con 
gratulatory  upon  the  shot  missing  his  Grace  on  ye  street  of  Edinburgh,  and 
condoleing  upon  its  wounding  the  Bp.  of  Orkney,  and  giving  an  Account 
y1  a  villain  had  wounded  my  Jjord  General's  porter;   and  on  being  taken,  he 
said  he  intended  to  have  murdered  the  King  and  ye  Duke  of  Albemaiie. 

8.  (Original)  Lauderdaill,  Augt.  2'.),  1(371.  to  Archbishop  Sharp,  where 
in  of  the  Vacancy  of  Edin1',  and  that  it  is  not  lit  that  any  Presbyter,  at  first 
dash,  should  be  preferred  to  it,  and  desiring  to  know  whom  the  Archbishop 
judges  to  be  fittest  i'or  it. 

10.  (Original)   Lauderdale  (so  spelled  here),  June   13,  Ki7i,  to  Arch 
bishop  Sharp,  about  the  King's  commands  to  suppress  all  scandalous  and 
seditious  Conventicles,  and  great  endeavours  being  used  to  alarm  all  Eng 
land  wl  the  fears  of  a  present  Pebellion  in  Scotland,  and  the  Petitions  in 
Scotland  for  a  National  Assembly,  us  being  intended  more  against  Epis 
copacy  than  against  Conventicles,  comparing  such  Petitions  to  those  of  1037 
and   1038;    and  about  the  King's  being  very  careful  that  ye  honour  and 
authority  of  the  Bishops  may  be  preserved,  and  all  contrivances   against 
them  suppressed  and  punished,  Ac.      [Printed  in  Stephen's  Life  and  Times 
of  Sharp,  p.  -155.] 

11.  (Original)  Very  angry  Letter  of  Bp.  Puunsay  of  Dunblane,  June  7, 
1(575,  to  Archbishop  Sharp,  both  then  at  London,  about  his  being  turned 
out  of  JDunblaiio  Diocese,  &c.,  wl  the  Archbishop's  answer,  June  8th,  1675, 
tacked  to  it.  and  in  his  own  holograph. 

12.  (Original)  Lauderdale,  March  21st,   1G7G,   to  Archbishop  Sharp. 
Herein  a  promise  of  King  Charles  2,  not  to  Sign  a  Presentation  to  any  See 
in  Scotland,  but  such  as  shall  have  the  approbation  of  the  two  Archbishops 
wtiii  their  respective  Provinces,  Ac. 

13.  (Original)   Lauderdale,    July    18th,    1G70,    to   Archbishop    Sharp, 
wherein,  inter  alix,  to  ye  same  purpose:   "  Therefore,  I  beseech  your  Grace 
to  write  to  me  whom  you  will  pitch  upon  for  the  vacant  Bishopricks,  and 
then  we  shall  be  quiet,"     IS". 13. —Copy  tacked  to  this  Letter  of  a  remarkable 
paragraph  from  the  Life  of  Dr.  Berwick,  afterwards  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  im 
porting,  "that  as  in  the  Usurpation  of  Oliver  Cromwell,  the  usual  method 
of  filling  the  Sees  in  England  was  utterly  impracticable  ;  therefore  the  King 
should  be  Petitioned  to  grant  his  Koyal  License,  impowering  the  Bishops  to" 


JAMES  SHARP.  85 

meet  together  and  to  make  clioico  of  fitt  persons,  according  to  ye  Canon  and 
practice  of  the  Primitive  Church  ;  which  scheme  his  Majesty  most  graciously 
received  and  approved  of,  etc.  And  thus  the  Consecrations  were  to  be  per 
formed  in  a  Canonical  manner,  and  with  the  utmost  prudence  and  precaution 
as  to  ye  safety  of  the  Consecrators  and  Consecrated  from  any  persecution 
from  the  enemy." 

14.  (Original)    Laudcrdale,   Janry.    25,    1G79,    to    Archbishop    Sharp, 
intimating  cnmje  d'  dire  to  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Ross  to  Elect  the  Bishop 
of  Galloway. 

15.  (Copy)  Augt.  19,  1G70,  of  the  Declaration  of  King  Charles  the  2d, 
in  favours  of  the  Archbishops   of  St.  Andrews   and   Glasgow,   concerning 
Presentations  to  the  Churches  that  arc  at  his  Majesty's  disposal,  to  be  only 
by  their  recommendations. 

1(3.  (Original)  May  Gth,  Lauderdalo  to  Archbishop  Sharp,  about  ye 
increase  of  lawless  Conventicles,  and  particularly  that  ye  common  hangman 
of  Irvin  keeps  Conventicles  and  Preaches. 

17.  (Original)  Octor.  20ih,  at  noon,  Holyroodhouse,  Rotlics  and  Laudcr- 
daill  to  Archbishop  Sharp,  informing  that  the  King  had  restored  the  now 
Earl  of  Argile  to  that  Title,  but  not  to  be  a  Marquis,  with  a  small  competency 
to  him,  and  the  rest  of  the  Estate  to  the  Creditors. 

18.  (Copy)  Some  Account  of  the  Murderers  of  Archbp.  Sharp,  by  name 
and  surname,  without  a  Date. 

19.  (Original)  Some  Account  of  the  Murder  and  Murderers  of  Archbp. 
Sharp  (not  the  same  with  the  foregoing),  in  an  anonymous  Letter  to  Sir 
William  Sharp,  without  a  Date. 

20.  (Copy)    Order   of  James,   Lord   Archbishop  of   St.   Andrews,   his 
Funerals,  on  Saturday,  May  17,  1(57'.).      [Given  under  IV.,  following.] 

21.  (Original)  Warrant  for  the  Execution  of  Andrew  Guilan,  one  of  the 
murderers    of  Archbishop   Sharp,   July   12,   1083.     Subscribed   by  Perth, 
Maitland,  Jas.  Foulis,  &c. 

dumber  '2ml. 

0.  (Original)  July  0,  1G75.  lip.  Patcrson  to  Archbp.  Sharp,  then  at 
Bath  for  health ;  wherein  of  a  Meeting  of  5  Bishops  at  Edinr,  about  ye 
Malleurs  infesting  the  Church,  and  not  a  word  of  any  Presbyter  present,  or 
invited  to  be  present.  Subscribed  thus — Jo.  Gallovidicu. 

7.  (Original)  Without  Date.  Abp.  Patersou  to  Abp.  Sharp,  concerning 
Bp.  Ramsay's  removal  by  the  King  (Sec.  11  in  Num.  1st),  from  one  See  to 
another,  for  fomenting  and  abetting  the  Clergy  insolently  to  insist  for  a 
National  Synod  or  Convocation  ;  concerning  bad  tendency  of  such  a  Synod; 
and  concerning  an  Address  by  the  Commons  in  England  against  Lauderdale. 

11.  Authentick  Copy  of  a  Paper,  Signed  at  Court  by  the  Abp.  of  St. 
Andrews  and  the  Bishop  of  Edin1',  March  1G8G,  for  taking  off  the  sanguinary 
Laws  concerning  Religion  w*  relation  to  ye  Papists. 

22.  (Copy)  Act  of  Indemnity,  K.  James  7,  June  14,  1G88,  excepting 
the  murderers  of  Abp.  Sharp,  Fcrgusson  the  Plotter,  Home  of  Polwart; 
Fletcher  of  Salton ;  Mr.  Gilbert  Burnet,  &c. 

What  follows  is  from  a  Letter  from  the  Rev.  Robert  Forbes  of  Leith 
(afterward  Bishop  of  Caithness)  to  Bishop  Alexander  at  Alloa,  about  the 
•  delivery  of  the  Episcopal  Chest,  directed  thus  : — 


ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  AXD11EAYS. 


Madam,  _  By  ye  -appointment  of  the  Bps.  of  ye  Church.  Bp.  Keith, 
your  worthy  husband,  was  to  provide  ;i  Chest,  and  put  therein  all  such 
AYrits,  Registers,  and  Tapers  as  related  to  our  Church  affairs,  which  he 
cither'  then  had  or  should  procure-  from  his  Brethren  or  oyrs.  And  it  was 
ordered  also  that  this  should  remain  in  his  custody,  hut  on  his  Demise  in 
the  custody  of  the  succeeding  Primus;  which  Providence  having  ordered  to 
he  inv  lot,  'it  becomes  a  duty  incumbent  on  me  to  call  for  that  Chest  and  ye 
contents  ylvof  ;  and  being  so,  1  intreat  you'll  be  pleased  to  deliver  it  to  the 
Kd.  Mr.  "William  Bell,  whom  I  have  commissioned  to  call  for  it  and  send  it 
to  me  ;  who,  if  you  desire,  will  give  you  a,  f  !ecl  for  it,  ql'h  shall  be  sustained 
bv  me.'  You  see.  Madam.  yl  I  am  obliged  to  make  ye  demand,  qch  I  hope 
you'll  take  in  good  part,  and  believe  yl  q'vin  it  lies  in  my  power  to  serve  you, 
I  am  (wl  ye  tender  of  my  best  wishes  to  you  and  yours),  Madam, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 
Cupar,  July  19,  1757.  Uou- 


XI.  _  EXCERPTS  FROM  TIIK  HOUSEHOLD   BOOK  OF  MY  LORD  ARCHBISHOP  OF 
ST.  ANDREWS,  FROM  1008  TO  10(30. 

The  Book  contains  several  Journey-charges  of  the  Archbishop  from  and 
to  St.  Andrews  and  Edinburgh,  as  also  frequent  Alms,  at  home  and  while 
travelling,  to  the  poor  at  Crail,  Kinghorn,  Eeith,  Edinburgh,  and  Falkland  ; 
to  widows,  lame  soldiers,  and  Highland  pipers.  A  great  space  is  devoted 
to  diet  expenses,  for  different  sorts  of  wines,  for  capons,  rabbits,  and  part- 

-•'•  X<>  such  Appointm*.  Order,  or  Regulation  on  record,  that  1  know  of.  It  must 
have  heen  onlv  oral.  "Was  not  said  Chest  in  ye  keeping  of  B.  K.  even  qn  .Dr.  Rattray 
was  Trimus'.'  "  Is  not  Kdr,  or  the  vicinity  of  it,  the  properest  place  lor  such  Chest  to 
lie  in'.'  It  \vas  ye  opinion  of  1!.  I\.  that  Bonnyhaujji  was  the  host  and  safest  place 
during  the  time'  of  the  Distress,  and  that  there,  B.  F.  and  R.  1'.  could  always  have 
easy  access  to  it  on  all  emergencies.  Jf  Memoirs  should  appear  in  Trint.  qch  is  still 
much  threatened,  is  it  not  advisahle  that  Chest  should  he  at  hand  lor  expeding  an 
answer,  qch  is  not  to  he  expected  from  Cupar  or  its  neighbourhood?  Mr.  13.  delivered 
ye  above  Lr  (Dated  on  the  very  day  on  qch  T>.  F.  parted  from  B.  "W.i,  out  of  his  own 
hand,  and  Mrs.  K.  made  this  answer  :  "  Indeed.  Mr.  B..  I  can  make  no  answer  to  this 
till  I  see  Mr.  Forbes,  who  is  searching  among  Mr.  K.  his  Tapers,  and  adding  greatly 
to  the  Chest,  insomuch  that  it  cannot  contain  all  y*  he  lias  already  picked  out  for  that 
purpose  ;  and  therefore  15.  F.  has  bespoke  a  larger  Chest  to  be  made  at  bis  own  ex- 
pence.  And  now  you  must  see  that  1  can  make  no  ans1'  till  I  see  B.  F.  himself.'1 
"  O.  Madam.1'  said'  he,  "  there  is  no  haste,  no  hurry  at  all  in  the  matter.  Take  your 
own  time.  Tut  who  is  employed  to  make  the  said  Chest'.'"  "I  believe,'1  said 
she,  "  Thomas  Wilson." 

N.B.  —  It  will  be  hard,  methinks,  if  ye  Chest  should  go  a  bellii'tu'eriny  into  ye 
Country  over  the  Forth,  especially  qn  I'm  at  so  much  pains  about  it.  Please  return 
the  inclosed  with  your  coiiveniency.  It  came  after  I  had  scribbled  all  this  some 
hours.  HOBT.  FORBES. 

[The  Initials  in  the  above  Note  are  —  B.  K.,  for  Bishop  Keith;  B.  F.,  Bishop 
Freebaim;  11.  F.,  Rev.  llobert  Forbes;  B.  W.,  Bishop  White;  Mr.  B.,  Rev.  William 
Bell.—  ED.J 


JAMES  SHAEP.  87 

ridges  ;    tobacco   pipes,  flnicks,   and   moor   fowls  ;    tame   pigeons,   ducks, 
chickens,  and  turkeys. 

The  Money  columns  are  Sent*.  Twenty  Pounds  Scots  £1  Sterling. 
One  Shilling  Scots  -  One  Penny  Sterling.  One  Penny  Scots  =  -  7'.y  of  a  Penny 
Sterling. 


Aug.  15,  1068. — For  a  pair  of  shiverines  to  my  Lord  and  drink 

money  to  the  boy,  -  001  18  00 

20. — To  the  harbour 'for  trimeing  my  Lord,  -  000  18  00 

Sept.  22. — For  washing  my  Lord  cloathes  at  ?>  several  tymes,  -  003  01  00 

For  a  link  to  wait  011  the  coatche,  -  000  00  00 

28. — For  ribbanes  to  my  Lord  shoes,  -  000  0!)  00 
Oct.  :->. — For  2  ellis  of  creap  for  a  murneing  string  when  the 

Bishop  of  Orknay  Died,  at  2  /  1:-)  «  the  ell,  is  -  005  00  00 

For  a  pair  of  black  shainbo  gloves  to  my  Lord,  -  001  10  00 

For  0  quarteris  of  black  silk  coard  to  my  Lords  halt.  -  -  000  05  00 

11.— For  tuo  linkis  at  the  Laird  of  Grantis  buriall,  -  000  12  00 

14.-— For  a  bybill  to  Y\"illiamc  Sharpe,  -  004  10  00 

For  six  fjuartcris  of  black  ribbanes  to  my  Lord,  -  000  08  00 

15. — For  a  link  to  wait  on  the  coatch  to  the  abbay,  -  000  00  00 

Xov.  11.— For  two  linkis  at  my  Lord  Glasgowes  buriall,  -  000  12  00 

14. — For  a  link  to  the  coatche  going  to  Ladie  Glasgowes  hous,  -  000  00  00 

For  holhuid  to  be  band  and  cufiis  to  my  Lord,  -  004  00  00 

For  cours  holland  to  be  stockis  to  the  band  and  cufiis,  -  000  12  00 

17. — For  a  link  goeing  to  my  Lord  Chancellours  hous,  -  000  00  00 

For  a  link  to  my  Lord  Presidents  hous,  -  000  00  00 
The  compt  of  the  money  given  to  the  poore  in  smallis  thir  3 

monthcs  bygane  comes  in  haill  to  -  010  19  08 

To  a  poore  shoulder  at  the  abbay  church  doore,  -  000  00  00 
To  the  poore  people  at  the  abbay  church  on  both  sydes  of  the 

coatche,  -  000  04  00 
To  poore  people  at  scvcrall  t3*mes  at  the  hous  and  abroad  at  the 

coatche  theis  ten  daycs  bygane,  -  001  02  00 
Nov. — Payed  to  ane  apothecarie  at  St.  Androis  for  some  oyllis 

and  droiuns  to  the  coatch  horse.                                                -  001  08  00 


Monenday,  Dec.  7,  1004. — For  fyrc  in  the  morneingand  at  night,  000  17  00 
For  bread  and  drink  in  the  morneing  and  at  night,  and  for 

cheese,  -  001  01  00 

For  a  coatche  to  Yorcester  hous,  Durham,  zaird  Lady  Balheavin 

and  home,  -  002  08  00 

Dinner  for  a  pullet,  -  001  08  00 

For  butter  limou  turnepis  and  pepper  and  egges,  -  000  09  00 

For  dresing  the  pullet  and  a  peice  of  beiff  at  4  .s  the  piece,  -  000  08  00 
For  aile,  bread,  fyre,  and  a  pynt  of  claret  at  dinner,  -  -  001  10  00 


88  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

For  fyro  at  night,  -  000  10  00 
Saboth.  —  Dinner  to  many  noblemen  for  2  barrell  of  oysteris,  -  004  00  00 

For  a  clisho  of  fislio  with  egges  and  butter,  -  -  003  00  00 

For  a  Yestphdia  ham  with  chcekiner.,  -  013  0-i  00 

For  a  coaclis  head  and  oysteris,  •  -  000  0(5  00 

For  a  dishe  of  stewed  carpis,  -  000  00  00 

For  a  dishc  of  dried  quhil  tines,  •  -  003  00  00 

For  a  dishe  of  fried  smeltis,  -  001  1(>  00 

For  a  chyn  of  salmond,  -  003  12  00 

For  a  jouyll  of  sturgeon,  -  000  00  00 

For  a  tart,  -  <>or>  0-2  00 

For  oringis,  Yincgare,  spycc,  and  tobaco  pypis,  -  000  18  00 
Die  llnrlij*.  —  For  a  ]\vnt  of  wormwood  wyne  in  the  morning,  and 

a  quartclaret  at  night,  and  for  pippins,  -  001  10  00 

Supper  to  many  noblemen  and  ntheris  for  a  young  tnrkie  and 

dressing,  "  -  003  10  00 

For  3  phesines  at  3  lib.  the  peh-e,  -  00!)  00  00 

For  tuo  woodcockes,  -  002  08  00 

For  tuo  pullctis,  .  003  00  00 

For  4  pcrtrigis,  -  004  10  00 

For  4  chcekincs  at  10  «  the  peicc,  -  003  04  00 

For  aples  and  carvie,  •  -  000  18  00 

For  oringis  and  limones,  -  000  10  00 

For  anchoves  to  be  a  dishe  to  be  sauce,  -  001  02  00 

For  olives,  capcris,  vinegare,  spycc,,  and  butter,  -  001  00  00 

For  oysteris,  ailc,  mustard,  suggar,  and  pearsle,  -  001  08  00 

For  4  bottillis  of  cedar,  -  ()0l  04  00 

For  a  peice  of  beef  at  dinner  to  the  servants,  -  ()()()  10  00 

To  the  Landlady  for  supper  dressing,  kitchene,  and  fyrc,  -  001  10  00 

For  pypcs  io  Lauderdaill,  and  for  bread  at  night,  -  000  10  00 

Item  in  drink  money  to  my  Lord  Lauderdaill's  scrvands,  -  000  00  00 


(>f  M~/»i<'i/  (jlrt-ii  in  mi/  Lnnl  ArclilisJinp  <>f  St.  Antlroix  Jiis   Grace,  and 


/it  his  iliirrtion  in  L»>i<!oit>i  frmn  November  23,  1003,  ////  J 


For  a  chair  to  the  waiter  my  Lord  going  to  Lambeth,  -  000  12  00 

For  ribbones  to  my  Lordis  tippet,  .  OQO  00  00 

To  my  Lord  going  to  the  Kingis  chappill,    -  -  000  00  00 

For  a  chayre  thcr,  .  QQQ  12  00 

For  a  chayre  to  the  waiter,  .  QQO  12  00 

For  trimming  my  Lord,  and  for  a  newos  book",  -  001   05  00 
For  a  pair  of  shoes  and  galloshes  to  my  Lord  and  ribbanes,        -  000  08  00 

To  Mr.  Bloures  man  bringing  home  the  new  gowno,  -  -  001  10  00 

For  ane  ivorie  cabinet,  .  Q72  00  00 

For  ane  new  halt  to  my  Lord,  .  003  00  00 

For  dressing  the  old  halt,  and  for  pock  and  string,  -  003  00  00 

For  cutting  my  Lordis  litell  seall,  .  012  00  00 

For  a  new  satin  cap,  .  003  00  00 

For  small  ribbanes  for  the  key  of  the  cabinet,  -  000  03  00 

Given  to  a  poor  widdow  at  my  Lordis  direction,  -  001  04  00 


JAMES  SHABP.  83 

Cristmas  Day  to  my  Lordis  going  to  the  Chapill,  -  003  06  00 

To  the  doore  keeper  of  the  Chapill,  given  by  my  Lord,  -  006  00  00 

For  a  chayre  to  Bishop  Winchesters,  -  000  12  00 

For  a  chayre  from  Whithall  in  tyme  of  rayne,  -  000  12  00 

Jan.   1664.  —  To   the   keeper   of  Lambeth   Chapill  to   see  the 

cushyon,  -  000  12  CO 

For  rebbanes,  necklaces,  and  pendentes  for  the  childrene,  -  012  00  00 

For  tuo  satin  capis  to  the  bairnes,  -  004  04  00 

For  a  paire  of  stockingis  to  my  Lord,  -  003  12  00 

For  2  stemiu  petticoatis  and  2  bairnes  coatis,  -  040  10  00 

For  4  timber  combes  for  my  Lady,  -  001  10  00 

For  2  home  combes  and  a  caice,  -  001  04  00 

For  a  pair  of  gray  schooes  to  my  Lord,  and  drink  money,  -  003  12  00 

To  my  Lord  to  give  in  drink  money  for  the  asses,  -  006  00  00 

For  the  asses  stable  and  meat  a  night,  -  001  04  00 

To  Mr.  Lockhart  for  my  Lords  pistolls,  bought  be  him,  -  018  00  00 

For  a  new  scabboord  to  my  Lord  sword,  -  001  04  00 

For  orange  flower  watter  to  my  Lord,  -  002  OS  00 


i*  Lordship  since  February  3. 

At  the  Consecration  to  his  Lordship  in  the  Churche,  -  -  005  16  00 

For  vashing  his  Lordships  cloathis  at  Edinburgh,  being  all  foull 

efter  the  journey,  -  -  001  05  00 

To  a  tailziers  man  for  mending  his  Lordships  cloak  and  doublet,  000  12  00 

For  3  Spainsche  bisomes  and  3  mapis  sent  to  St.  Androis,          -  001  16  00 

For  a  new  bitt  to  my  Lordis  new  Londoun  brydill,  -  001  10  00 

May  21.  —  For  drugis  to  the  childrene  quhen  they  got  all  phisick 

2  or  3  dayis  together  from  Doctor  Pittilluo,  -  007 

28.  —  For  fixing  a  ston  in  a  ring,  -  000 

To  a  barber  the  day  of  the  Chanclours  buriall,  -  000 

For  a  pair  of  murneing  shoes  to  his  Lordship,  -  002 

For  dressing  his  Lordship  hatt  and  a  new  pock  therto,  -  002 

For  a  Solen  goose  sent  to  St.  Androis,  -  000 

Debursed  tit  7i/.s  (Trace's  direction. 

1664.  Feb.  8.—  To  the  Earle  of  Athollis  mane  that  brought  wyld 

foull,  -  001  16  00 

To  John  Wilsone,  bell  man  of  Crail,  -  001  04  00 

To  the  Ladle  to  buy  a  pig,  -  000  18  00 

For  a  pocket  inkhorne  for  "William  Sharpe,  -  000  05  00 

For  sex  new  bee  scapis  at  8  .s-  the  piece,  -  002  08  00 

May  4.  —  To  William  Sharpe  for  a  paire  of  arrowes,  -                 -  000  10  00 

For  a  glove  and  a  brace,  -  000  14  00 

For  a  bow  string,  -  000  03  00 

Aug.  22.  —  For  soiling  his  Lordships  stockengis,  -  000  03  00 

Ane  Accompt  of  1m  Grace  i>nj  Lord  Archbischop  of  St.  Androis,  his  Debursementis 

for  neccssarix  and  other  way  is  at  Londoun  from  Auyust  30  till  Oct.  18,  1664. 

Sept.  19,  1664.  —  To  the  Archbishop  Laudis  devotion  and  a  newes 

book,  -  000  13  00 

VOL.  II.  M 


1JU  AitCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDKKWS. 

Sept.  22. — For  a  paire  of  French  litill  sweet  gloves  to  his  Lord 
ship,  -  001  16  00 
Oct.  4. — For  mending  and  soiling  his  Lordships  stockeines,  -  000  12  00 
6. — Payed  to  Jolino  Kirkwood  for  his  Lordships  scale,  -  02-1  00  00 
To  a  staff  with  a  silver  head,  2  caice  of  knyves,  and  a  hell,  -  020  08  00 
8.' — To  a  hoy  with  ane  lanthrene  from  Lauderdaills,  -  -  000  06  00 
Dec.  13. — For  a  horse  hvre  to  Balcarras  for  Mr.  Gilhert  Burnet,  000  12  CO 


Dec.  8. — To  his  Lordship  tho  day  Margaret  Sharpe  was  home, 

10  dollars,  -  029  00  00 

For  a  Yirgall  to  \Yilliame  Sharp  and  for  glasping  it,  -  -  000  16  00 

12. — To  the  poorc  the  day  of  Margaret  Sharpe's  christeneing,    -  002  1-1  00 

For  a  quart  of  wyne  the  day  of  hir  christeneing,  -  002  00  00 

I  lixcJmi't/i',   16(>-">. 

April  13. — For  black  silk  cord  for  breeches,  -  000  04  00 

May  2. — For  a  great  satin  cap  to  his  grace,  be  accompt.  -  004  02  00 

3. — For  a  silver  needle  to  Agnes  Sharpe,  -  001   10  80 

29. — For  a  tarr  barrell  to  the  boncfyre,  -  000  12  00 

Oct.  4. — For  the  heirdis  fie  this  half  yeire.  -  -  002  04  00 

19.   To  a  poor  man  and  to  a  pypcr,  -  000  08  00 

20. — For  a  pairc  of  chamber  gloves  to  his  Grace,  000  14  00 

For  2  vnces  of  fine  sealling  waxe,  -  000  12  00 

For  2  clubs  and  2  ballis  to  AYilliamc  Sharpe,  -  001   04  00 

Nov.  14. — To  his  Grace  going  to  Church  on  Tuysday.  -  000  12  00 

16. — To  his  Grace  going  to  Church  on  Thursday,  -  000  12  00 

For  two  goff  ballis  to  AYilliame  Sharpe,  -  000  08  00 

19. — To  his  Grace,  being  Sabboth,  -  ()01  09  00 

To  my  Lord  Bischop  of  Dunkeldis  man  with  muirfoullis,  -  001  09  00 

June  13. — To  the  waiter  wyff  that  furnished  waiter  to  the  lions,  000  06  08 

Accompt  <>J  ^loneyis  ijircn  to  Jtis  (jntce  start'  1  J«mt<ir  1666. 

Feb.  9. — To  your  Grace  on  Sabboth  at  St.  Androis,  -  -  001  09  00 

To  your  grace  at  Edinburgh  comeing  doune  to  Leith  in  small 

money  and  turneris,  .  Q03  14.  QQ 

15. — To  your  Grace  going  to  Church  on  Thursday,  -  -  000  12  00 

To  your  Grace  the  day  Johne  Sharpe  was  Christened,  in  small 

money  and  turneris,  .  Q04  07  00 

Mar.  18. — To  your  Grace  at  Agnes  Sharpis  burial,  10  dollars,  -  029  00  00 
Apryl  12. — To  your  Graces  going  to  sermon  on  Good  Fryday,  -  001  09  00 
To  your  Grace  goeing  to  Sermon  on  Easter  day,  -  001  09  00 

20. — To  the  medwyff,  -  .  902  18  00 

May. — To  your  Grace  in  a  Paper  given  to  my  Lady,  -  -  100  00  00 

Accompt  of  Monet/is  delmrscd  at  his  Grace's  directione  to  Barberis,  Puore, 

and  others. 

For  carieing  up  of  tuo  puncheons  of  vine  from  Anstruther,         -  004  00  00 


JAMES  SHARP.  91 

For  a  quarters  board  of  Margaret  Sharpe,   -  -  010  00  00 

To  the  violcrs  in  the  Abhay,  -  002  18  00 

To  the  Laird  of  Xydies  man  that  brought  troutis,  -  000  12  00 
To  Goorfrc  Xairne  for  bowelling  A.  S.,  and  for  a  schear  cloth, 

15  dollors,  -  043  10  00 

Mair  to  Andrew  Sword  for  the  same  vse,  3  dollors,  -  008  14  00 

To  be  distribut  among  the  poorc  the  day  of  the  buriall,  -  Oil   12  00 

To  the  servantis  about  the  kirk,  2  dollors,  -  -  005  1C  00 

For  the  mortcloath,  1  dollor,  -  002  18  00 

To  the  pcrsones  that  carried  the  silver  stailis,  3  dollors,  -  008  14  00 

To  the  poor  boxc  in  the  sessione,  -  000  13  01 

Acconnit  of  i/oi/r  (_rr<irix  clutin/ix  «l   London,  ami  of  money  ijircn  at   i/oiir  (rnicis 

ilircctinii  xtin-e  M«>i  15. 

For  tuo  fanes  and  tuo  rollis,                                                               -  000  00  00 
For  a  silver  needle  to  my  Lady,   -                                                      -  001   10  00 
For  2  ell  and  .',  of  skarlet,  at  19  lib  10  *,  to  be  my  Ladies  petti 
coat,                                                                                                -  047  00  06 
For  5  ycardis  .',  of  tiannen  for  a  petticoat  to  my  Ladie  at  1  lib 

ll  .,,  -  009  00  00 

For  another  greene  tuillcd  night  cap,  -  002  14  00 

For  tuo  quint  tuillcd  capis  at  night,  -  003  00  00 

Foure  fyne  timber  combis  and  2  home  combis,  with  caices,  000  00  00 

For  2  pocket  Bibillis,    -  -  007  00  00 

For  a  seare  cloth  for  your  Gracis  issue,  -  000  09  00 

III. — XOTANDA. 

In  the  old  Church-yard  of  the  Parish  of  Banff,  there  was  a  Stone  with 
the  following  Inscription,  which  has  been  renewed  in  erecting  a  new  wall  :— 
"In  this  Cemetery  are  interred  the  remains  of  Robert  Sharp  of  Kiniuvie, 
Provost  of  Banff,  and  the  father  of  Dr.  James  Sharp,  Archbishop  of  St. 
Andrews,  who  was  Born  in  May,  1013,  in  the  Castle  of  Banff,  the  residence 
of  the  Family,  and  basely  murdered  on  the  3d  of  May,  1079.  Also  Robert 
Sharp,  Sheriff  Clerk  of  Bauffshire  ;  his  spouse,  Janet  Abercromby  of  Birken- 
borr ;  Mrs.  Ann  Hamilton,  his  niece,  and  other  descendants  of  the  Family. 
The  above  Inscription  was  renewed  on  the  present  enclosing  walls,  erected 
by  public  subscription  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1805.  Domine,  dirigie  nos." 
Beside  the  Inscription  is  a  representation  of  the  Armorial  Bearings  of 
"  Robert  Sharp,"  with  the  Date  1007,  and  several  initial  letters. 

Archbishop  Sharp  was  made  a  Burgess  of  Glasgow: — "Decline  tertio 
Xoveris,  1000. — The  cjlk  day  the  most  Reverend  Fay1'  in  God,  James,  Arch 
bishop  of  St.  Androwes,  Primat  and  Metropolitan  of  Scotland,  is  made 
Burges  and  Gild  Broyr  of  ye  sd  Burgh.  [A.  (>>r  Eintujs  View  of  the  Mer 
chant'*  HoHKC  (if  (jltlNt/011-,  p.  125.] 

1865,  July-  While  on  a  visit  to  St.  Andrews,  the  Rev.  George  Gordon 
Milne,  late  Incumbent  of  S.  James',  Cupar,  shewed  me  the  original  Letters 


U2  AllCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDKE\YS. 

Patent  from  Charles  IE,  of  the  Present ulion  Charter  of  Archbishop  Sharp 
to  the  Metropolitan  See  of  St.  Andrews,  found  ut  Magus  Moor,  soaked  with 
/m-  murdered  blood.  It  is  given  in  Lyon's  History,  vol.  ii.,  381,  App.  This 
Chart  had  boon  repeatedly  put  to  the  test  by  competent  Antiquaries.  Mr. 
Milne  said—"  In  the  bowels  of  my  compassion,  I  lent  this  to  an  importunate 
friend,  who  was  anxious  to  take  an  impression  of  the  lloyjil  Seal,  and  he 
gratefully  returned  to  me  the  one  h«\f.  '  The  seal,'  the  friend  said,  '  broke 
among  his  fingers  !  ' ' 

Mr.  Alex.  Camming,  farmer  at  Craigherbs,  near  Mill  of  13oyiidie,  Banff- 
shire,  while  ploughing,  turned  up  a  small  stone,  on  which  some  engraving 
appeared,  and  which,  on  examination,  was  supposed  to  be  the  Seal  of  Arch 
bishop  Sharp,  as  it  bore  his  Family  Arms,  in  conjunction  with  those  of  the 
See,  with  the  Legend — Jaro/nt*  J-:j>i>«-<>j»ix  Smicli  Amlrc.  1838.  [Stephen's 
LLixtonj,  col.  ir.,  ]>.  518.] 

The  Wail  <tiul  M/nuicr  oj  the  L'onxccnttinit  of  tin'  S<-utti*li  ]lixlioj>*  at  Westminster, 

J),r.  15,  1001. 

The  fourc  Doctors,  Sharpp,  Eairefoule,  Hamilton,  and  Lightoun,  come 
in  coach  to  the  Dean  of  Westminster's  house  in  the  Cloister,  where  they 
were  mctt  by  four  Englishe  Bishopps,  London,  AYoorester,  St.  Asaph,  and 
Carlilc,  and  were  conducted  by  them  to  the  Church,  where  all  were  placed 
over  against  the  Pulpit.     The  -4  Scots  in  the  habite  of  Doctors,  with  their 
Canonicall  coates,  girdles,  gownes,  tippets,  and  corner  caps.     Sermon  being 
ended,  they  went  to  the  east  end  of  the  Church,  where  the  Altar  stands. 
London  having  the  action,  placed  himself  upon  the  right  side  of  the  Altar, 
Worcester   on  the  left;    the  rest,   Scotts  and  English,  standing  before  it. 
Then    Canterburie   being   Commissioner,   the   Commission  wras  read,   and 
London  proceeded  to  read  the  forme  of  the  booke  of  Common  Prayer,  each 
of  the  Scotts  having  one  in  their  hand.     After  some  time  spent  in  reading, 
the  Scotts  sate  down  before  the  Altar  on  their  knees,  in  which  posture  the 
oath  of  supremacie  was  tendered  to  them  by  the  Bishop  of  London,  they 
having  their  hands  on  the  booke  and  kissing  it.     This  done,  they  removed 
to  a  by-roome,  and  after  a  little  returned,  having  a  limicii  garment  above 
their  gownes,  such  as  a  shirt  without  sleaves.     In  this  garb  they  stood  some 
time  before  the  Altar,  and  then  returned  to  another  roome,  and  after  a  little 
come  in  againe  attired  as  Bishops,  thus — Above  the  liimen  garment  called 
a  rocket,  they  have  a  gowiie  without  sleaves,  of  a  rich  silk  stuffe,  and  to  it 
were  pinned  lawne  sleaves.     Having  stoode  a  little,  they  kneeled  againe 
before  the  altar.     Then  came  the  English  Bishops  and  laid  their  hands  on 
their  heads,  one  by  one.    The  Consecration  being  ended,  they  communicated 
thus — 2  English  Bishops  and  the  fourc   Scots,  kneeling  before  the  altar, 
receive  the  bread  and  wine  from  London.     This  done  they  rose,  and  the 
foure  Scots  Bishops  went  toward  the  Altar,  one  after  another,  bowing  as 
they  went,  and  then  kneeling  laid  downe  the  offering  upon  it.     After  which 


JAMES  SHAEP.  93 

they  went  to  Sir  Abraham  William's  house,  the  place  where  ambassadours 
are  received,  and  there  had  a  sumptuous  feast,  where  diverse  of  the  Scottish 
Nobilitie  were  present.  But  the  Lords  Middleton  and  Crawford  were  not, 
they  being  sicke.  All  this  is  testified  by  one  who  was  ane  eye  witnesse. 
(Andh'ctd  Scoticti,  ml.  i.,  j>.  70.] 

IV. — THE  PROCESSION  AND  BURIAL. 

The  remains  of  the  murdered  Prelate  were  removed  to  his  house  in  St. 
Andrews,  from  which,  after  thirteen  days,  they  were  removed  to  the  Parish 
Church.  The  Privy  Council  determined  to  honour  him  with  a  public 
Funeral.  It  was  performed  with  the  utmost  magnificence,  agreeable  to  a 
Programme  issued  by  the  Government,  the  original  of  which  is  in  the 
Episcopal  Chest  at  Glenalmond.  The  Order  directs,  that  the  Prebends  and 
Clergy  of  the  Metropolitical  Church  shall  meet  the  Body  in  their  Robes,  in 
good  order,  at  the  door  of  the  Church.  The  respectable  inhabitants  were 
directed  to  be  drawn  up  in  two  lines,  betwixt  the  Abbey  and  the  place  of 
interment,  for  keeping  off  the  crowd,  so  that  the  Procession  might  pass 
through  a  lane  betwixt  two  files,  without  interruption  or  disorder.  The 
Privy  Council  appointed  the  Archbishop  of  Glasgow  to  act  as  chief  mourner, 
assisted  by  the  other  Bishops  in  deep  mourning.  The  Privy  Council  were 
to  walk  in  a  body,  and  the  Macers  of  Court  were  to  walk  bare-headed,  as  a 
guard  to  the  honours  of  Purse  and  Mace. 

The  Procession,  as  marshalled  by  order  of  the  Privy  Council,  proceeded 
in  the  following  order  : — 

Sixty-one  old  men,  corresponding  to  the  years  of  the  defunct's  age,  each  in 
mourning-hoods  and  cloaks,  and  bearing  on  staves  the  Arms  of  the 
Archiepiscopal  See,  impaled  with  those  of  the  defunct,  one  preceding 
and  bearing  a  little  Gumphion,:;;  the  rest  following  two  and  two. 

The  Horse  of  State, 
Equipped  in  furniture,  as  for  the  Riding  of  Parliament, 

led  by  footmen  in  the  defunct's  livery ; 

Two  close  trumpets,  with  mourning  banners  ; 

A  horse  in  mourning,  led  by  footmen  in  mourning ; 

The  Great  Gumphion  borne  on  a  lance  ; 

The  great  mourning  Pencil,  j  borne 

by  Sir  John  Strachan ; 
The  defunct's  servants,  and  those  of  the  Nobility 

and  Gentry  in  mourning ; 

The  Magistrates  of  St.  Andrews  ; 

The  Magistrates  of  the  other  Royal  Burghs  ; 

The  Magistrates  of  Edinburgh  ; 

Professors  of  the  University  of  St.  Andrews  ; 

Clergymen  of  the  Diocese  ; 

;;:  From  the  old  French  word,  Gonfalon,  a  banner. 

-\  TVobably  from  the  French,  Pennonc^nn,  a  small  pennon. 


9-4  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDHEWS. 

Doctors  and  other  Dignitaries  in  the  Church  ; 

The  Kector  of  the  I'niversity,  ushered  by  his  three  Maces  ; 

Gentlemen  and  Knights,  two  and  two  ; 

The  Lords  of  Session, 

ushered  by  their  four  ordinary  Maccrs  ; 

The  Nobility,  according  to  their  rank,  two  and  two  ; 

Two  close  trumpets; 

A  mourning  standard,  borne  by  Sharp  of  Houston  ; 
Four  coats-of-arms.  two  paternal,  and  two  maternal,  borne 

each  after  the  other  : 

The  great  mourning  banner,  borne  by  Cunningham  of  Barnes  ; 

His  Grace's  .Physician,  Secretary,  and  Chaplain  ; 

Six  Pursuivants,  in  their  coats, 

two  and  two  ; 
Six  heralds  in  their  coats. 

two  and  two  : 

The  first  bearing,  on  an  antique  shield,  the  Arms  of  the  See, 

and  of  the  defunct,  impaled  ;  the  second,  that  of  the 

See;  the  third,  the  crosier;  the  fourth,  the 

scarf:  the  iifth,  the  gown; 

the  sixth  and  eldest,  the  mitre  on  a  velvet  cushion  ; 
The  Lord-Lyon,  Iving-at-arms,  in  his  coat; 

The  Lord  High-Chancellor, 
preceded  by  the  purse  and  great  mace  • 

.d  'THE  COFFIN,  ^ 

"o  a  adorned  with  scutcheons  of  the  defunct's  £j'  ^ 

£  o  arms,  impaled  with  those  of  the  See,  '^  |" 

§  ^  and  with  a  mitre  placed  on  a  velvet  cushion,  c"  £2 

^  .£  fringed  and  tasseled  with  gold,  %  g_ 

£  and  covered  with  crape  ;  sL 

Chief  mourners.  Sir  William  Sharp  of  Scot's  Craig, 

the  deceased's  only  son,  and 
Sir  William  Sharp  of  Stoneyhill,  the  deceased's  brother. 

Over  the  Coflin 

A  canopy,  adorned  with  the  mitre,  with  small  escutcheons, 
mort-heads,  and  cyphers,  borne  by  six  Moderators 

of  Presbyteries.  " 

The  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  aiid  all  the  Bishops  of  Scotland  ; 
The  bloody  gown  in  which  his  Grace  was  slain,  borne 

by  the  Chaplain  of  his  Household  ; 

The  coach  out  of  which  he  was  taken  and  murdered,  with  the 

coachman,  horses,  and  postilion,  all  in  deep  mourning. 

A  troop  of  horse-guards. 

The  Church  was  all  in  mourning;  the  Pulpit,  and  before  it  a  table 
covered  with  black  velvet,  on  which  the  coffin  was  placed.  The  Funeral 
Sermon  was  Preached  by  John,  Bishop  of  Edinburgh.  The  body  was  laid 
in  the  grave  with  the  sound  of  open  trumpets.  Over  the  grave  a  canopy  was 
erected,  covered  with  black  cloth,  and  adorned  with  the  gumphion,  stand 
ards,  banners,  &c.,  which  had  been  carried  in  the  procession. 


JAMES  SHARP. 


95 


AIK'liniSHOP  SHARPS  TOMB,  TOWN  CHri'.CII,  ST.   ANDREWS. 


90  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Y. — THE  TOMB  AND  THE  INSCRIPTION. 

About  a  year  and  a  half  after  the  Archbishop's  Murder,  his  sou,  Sir 
William  Sharp,  of  Scotscraig  and  Strathtyrmn,  applied  to  the  Kirk  Session 
for  permission  to  erect  a  Monument  over  his  father's  grave,  in  the  Town 
Church.  The  Magistrates  and  Session,  considering  "  the  honour  and  duty 
which  they  owed  to  the  memory  of  the  late  Lord  Primate,"  and  that  the 
Monument  would  be  an  ornament  to  the  Church,  gave  their  consent  for  the 
erection.  So  Sir  William  disponed  to  the  Kirk  Session  an  Heritable  Bond 
which  he  held  over  Lands  at  Boarhills,  to  the  amount  of  2500  Merks,  or 
i'lGGG  13*  -if/  Scots,  the  annual  Rent  of  which  was  to  be  drawn  by  the 
Session  till  the  principal  sum  was  redeemed,  and  was  to  be  applied  towards 
keeping  the  Monument  in  repair,  and  for  behoof  of  the  Poor.  On  the  prin 
cipal  sum  being  realized,  about  85  years  after,  the  Kirk  Session  hud  it  out 
in  purchasing  eight  acres  of  land,  in  that  portion  of  ground  called  '  the 
Prior's  Acres,'  and  in  assisting  to  pay  the  price  of  other  six  acres,  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Town,  purchased  from  Mr.  George  Hay  of  Leys.  These  lands 
continued  to  remain  in  the  possession  of  the  Kirk  Session  till  the  passing  of 
the  Scottish  Poor  Law  Act,  when  they  were  transferred  to  the  management 
of  the  Parochial  Board.  The  Papers  adducing  these  facts  cast  up  in  1849, 
being  found  among  the  Kirk  Session  Records  in  an  old  box,  and  on  being 
produced  to  the  Board  they  gave  instructions  for  the  complete  repair  and 
renovation  of  the  Tomb.  At  the  commencement  of  these  repairs,  it  was 
resolved  to  open  it.  Accordingly,  on  the'  Gth  of  March,  1840,  the  workmen 
proceeded,  in  presence  of  the  Magistrates,  the  Parochial  Board,  and  others 
interested,  to  remove  the  large  flat  stones  in  front  of  the  Monument ;  which 
being  done,  an  entrance  was  easily  effected  into  the  Vault  below. 

The  Yault  may  be  described  as  a  Stone  Chest,  the  inside  measurement 
of  which  is  7  feet  4  inches  in  length,  and  four  feet  in  depth  ;  breadth,  at  the 
head  3-J,  and  at  the  foot  2.V  feet.  Each  side  and  end  is  composed  of  one 
standing  on  edge,  and  the  top  is  one  stone,  about  10  feet  by  5.  In  the 
Yault  was  found  a  large  quantity  of  human  bones,  and  the  remains  of 
numerous  coffins,  under  all  of  which  were  discovered  the  remains  of  the 
coffin  of  the  Archbishop.  As  the  place  was  very  damp,  not  a  vestige  of  the 
wood  or  of  his  remains  were  to  be  found,  after  a  deposit  of  172  years.  The 
large  iron  handles,  and  some  of  the  corners,  plates,  &c.,  of  coffins,  were 
found  all  lying  in  their  places.  Considerable  anxiety  was  displayed  to  get 
hold  of  the  Skull,  but  it  was  not  to  be  found.  On  that  part  of  the  lid  which 
had  been  over  the  breast  was  found  what  was  allowed  to  be  a  composite,  on 
which  was  slightly  discernible  some  traces  of  figuring,  the  whole  surmounted 
by  a  knot  of  silk  ribbon.  Previous  to  closing  up,  a  bottle  was  placed  in  the 
Yault,  containing  the  names  of  those  who  were  present,  some  Documents 
relative  to  the  Monument,  and  a  few  Hand-bills.  It  appears  that  when  the 
Town  Church  was  repaired  GO  years  ago,  the  Yault  was  opened  then,  and 
the  Skull  carried  off.  Others  think  that  from  the  fact  of  the  Town  Council 


JAMES  SHAH  P.  97 

in  1725  having  offered  a  reward  of  ±'10  Sterling  for  the  discovery  of  persons 
who  had  broken  into  the  Church  at  night,  defacing  the  Monument,  and 
carrying  away  part  of  the  marble,  that  the  Tomb  must  have  been  pillaged 
then.  Previous  to  that  Date  it  was  very  common  to  have  Interments  in  the 
Church.  When  the  floor  came  to  be  levelled  for  the  seating,  all  human 
remains,  £c.,  were  thrown  .in  here  to  be  out  of  the  way,  which  accounts 
exactly  for  the  state  in  which  the  Vault  was  found. 

A  few  years  before  his  Death,  his  Grace  presented  to  the  Town  Church 
a  silver  Baptismal  Basin  and  Communion  Cup.  The  former  weighs  6i  oz. 
5  dwts.,  the  latter  weighs  87  oz.  12  dwts.;  and,  will  it  be  believed,  that  on 
Sacrament  Sundays,  at  the  Evening  Sermon,  this  Chalice  is  used  as  a 
Collection  Plate  at  the  door!  The  same  use  of  the  Communion  Cups  is  also 
made  at  Craill.  Each  has  the  following  Inscription  : — "  In  usum  ecclesiae 
parochialis  civitatis  Scti.  Andrcae,  donavit  Jacobus  archiepiscopus,  anno 
1G75." 

On  the  upper  part  of  the  Monument  is  an  emblematical  representation  of 
the  Archbishop  supporting  the  Church,  rent — rather  grotesquely  ;  next  below 
are  two  Angels  with  wings  extended,  supporting  the  Shield,  Mitre,  and  Crosiers. 
In  the  centre  the  Archbishop  is  kneeling,  while  an  Angel  places  the  Crown 
of  Martyrdom  on  his  head.  I'ro  tnitr/t  cornnmn  from  that  time  became  the 
Family  Motto.  Beneath  is  an  Urn,  containing  the  Inscription,  under  which 
is  a  Bas-relief  representation  of  the  Murder.  In  the  background  the  assas 
sins  are  in  pursuit  of  the  carriage ;  in  the  front  view  they  are  putting  the 
Primate  to  death,  Guillau  holding  the  horses,  Ilaxton  lingering  aside  on 
horseback,  and  the  others  in  the  act  of  the  Murder.  The  daughter  of  the 
Archbishop  is  detained  by  two  of  the  conspirators,  while  in  an  imploring 
attitude  she  begs  her  father's  life.  The  following  is  a  Translation  of  the 
Epitaph  on  the  Urn  of  the  Monument : — 

To    GOD,    THE    GREATEST    AND    THE    BEST. 

This  lofty  Mausoleum  covers  the  most  precious  remains  of 
a  most  holy  Prelate,  most  prudent  Senator, 

and  most  holy  Martyr ; 
For  here  lies  all  that  is  left  under  the  sun  of  the  most 

Reverend  Father  in  Christ, 

JAMES  SHARP,  D.D.,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  Primate  of 
all  Scotland,  &c. ; 

WHOM 
The  University,  as  a  Professor  of  Philosophy  and  Theology ;  the 

Church  as  a  Priest,  a  Doctor,  and  a  Ruler; 
Scotland  as  a  Chief  Minister,  both  in  her  Civil  and  Eccle 
siastical  affairs  ; 
Britain,  as  the  Adviser  of  the  Restoration  of  King  Charles  II. 

and  of  Monarchy ; 
The  Christian  World,  as  the  Restorer  of  the  Episcopal  Order 

in  Scotland — 
Saw,  Acknowledged,  and  Admired ; 

VOL.  II.  N 


98  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  ST.  ANDREWS. 

WHOM 

All  good  and  faithful  Subjects  perceived  to  be  a  Pattern  of 
Piety,  an  Angel  of  Peace,  an  Oracle  of  Wisdom, 

an  Example  of  Dignity  ; 

And  all  the  enemies  of  God,  of  the  King,  and  of  the  Church, 

Found  the  implacable  Eoc  of  Impiety,  of 

Treason,  and  of  Schism. 

AND  WHOM, 

Notwithstanding  he  was  endowed  with  such  great  and  excellent  qualities,  a 
baud  of  nine  parricides,  through  the  fury  of  Fanaticism,  in  the  light  of  noon 
day,  and  in  the  "Vicinity  of  his  own  Metropolitan  City,  murdered  in  a  horrible 
manner,  with  many  AYounds,  from  Pistols,  Swords,  and  Daggers,  after  they 
had  wounded  his  most  beloved  eldest  Daughter  and  Domestics,  weeping  and 
imploring  mercy  on  their  knees,  and  whilst  he  himself  had  also  fallen  on  his 
knees  to  implore  mercy  for  them,  on  the  3d  of  May,  1071),  in  the  Gist  year 
of  his  age. 

LIT.  ALEXANDER  BUHNET.     A.D.  1679-1684.     (No  Seal.) 

Alexander  Burnct  was  son  of  Mr.  John  Biirnet,  a  Parochial 
Minister,  who  was  of  the  Family  of  Barns.  His  mother  was  a 
daughter  of  the  Family  of  Traquair.  He  was  Born  in  1614, 
and  was  Chaplain  to  the  great  Earl  of  Traquair.  After  the 
troubles  began,  he  retired  into  England ;  and,  being  there,  was 
put  into  Holy  Orders.  He  had  a  llcctory  in  the  County  of  Kent, 
but  was  turned  out  of  it  by  the  Puritans,  upon  the  score  of 
Loyalty,  in  1650.  After  this  he  went  beyond  sea,  and  had  the 
good  fortune  to  serve  his  then  Majesty,  King  Charles  II. ,  by 
intelligence  from  England  and  some  other  parts.  Upon  the 
Restoration,  he  became  Chaplain  to  General  llutherfortl,  his 
father's  first  cousin,  who  was  made  Earl  of  Teviot  sometime 
after.  When  this  heroic  Lord  was  constituted  Governor  of 
Dunkirk,  Mr.  Burnet  had  an  English  Congregation  there.  He 
was  made  Bishop  of  Aberdeen  upon  the  Death  of  Bishop 
Mitchell,  in  1662.  [Bishop  Mitchell  Died  in  February,  1663. 
According  to  a  MS.  correction  now  before  me,  he  succeeded  to 
the  Bishopric  of  Aberdeen  in  September,  1663. — M.  E.]  He  was 
Consecrated  at  St.  Andrews  by  Archbishop  Sharp,  "  some  other 
Bishops  being  present  at  that  time"  [Lament's  Dianj\,  on  the 
18th  September,  1663.  On  the  llth  April,  1664,  he  was  Trans 
lated  to  Glasgow,  and  after  Archbishop  Sharp's  Murder,  to  the 
See  of  St.  Andrews,  28th  Oct.,  1679,  where  he  Died  on  the  24th 


ABTHUE  EOSS.  99 

of  August,  1684,  and  was  Buried  in  S.  Salvator's  Church,  near 
the  Tomb  of  Bishop  Kennedy.  There  is  no  trace,  however,  of 
his  grave.  On  the  last  Letter  which  Archbishop  Bancroft 
received  from  this  Primate,  he  endorsed  the  following  lines  :— 

"  Obiit,  Aug.  22,  1G8-1,  horn  2<1  Matntina. 
Multis  ille  bonis  flebilis  oecidit ; 
Xulli  fk'bilior  quam  tibi,  Scotia." 

Fountainhall  says  that  Archbishop  Burnet  "  Died  at  his 
house,  in  the  Abbey  of  St.  Andrews,  22nd  of  October,  and  was 
Buried  in  S.  Salvator's  Church.  He  was  a  man  of  much 
moderation,  especially  since  he  was  laid  aside  in  1669."  He 
left  a  piece  of  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of  St.  Andrews  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Poor  of  the  Guildry  for  ever,  which  still  goes 
under  the  name  of  "Bishop  Burnet's  Acre."  It  yields  an 
annual  Rent  of  .€'5  Ws.  Martine  of  Claremont  (the  Author  of 
Ecliquice  Dii-i  Sti  Andrea',  from  which  others  besides  me  have 
borrowed  information  nowhere  else  to  be  had)  dedicates  his 
"  Tract,"  such  as  it  is,  to  Archbishop  Burnet,  in  August,  1683. 
This  small,  modest  "  Tract"  is  only  256  pages  quarto  !  Martine 
alludes  in  his  "Dedication"  to  the  Primate's  "exemplar  and 
unflexible  vertues,  pietie,  and  honour  (as  much  above  flatterie  as 
your  Grace  does  generously  despise  it),  that  have  justlie  raised 
your  Lordship  to  so  eminent  a  statione  in  the  Church,  and  put 
your  Grace  beyond  the  reach  of  their  malice,  under  whose 
tongues  lie  the  poison  of  asps.  .  .  .  And  when  your  Grace 
hath  for  many  years  most  successfullie  served  the  great  Bishope 
of  our  souls  in  your  generation,  that  you  may  peaceablie  ex 
change  your  Mitre  for  a  Crowne,  and  your  Rotchet  for  a  Robe 
of  Glorie." 

LIII.  ARTHUR  Ross.     A.D.  1684-1688. 

Arthur  Ross,  son  of  Alexander  Ross,  Parson  of  Birse,  in  the 
Shire  of  Aberdeen,  had  his  education  at  the  University  of  St. 
Andrews,  and  was  Minister  first  at  Kinerny,  next  at  Old  Deer, 
both  in  the  Shire  of  Aberdeen.  He  was  then  made  Parson  of 
Glasgow  in  1665,  in  which  station  he  continued  till  the  year 
1676.  He  was,  upon  the  Death  of  Bishop  Scrogie  of  Argyle, 


100 


ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 


promoted  to  that  Sec,  and  from  thence  was  Translated  to  the 
See  of  Glasgow  in  1070,  and  again  from  Glasgow  to  St.  Andrews, 
by  the  King's  Letters  Patent,  31st  October,  1084,  where  he 
continued  until  the  Revolution  in  1088  Deprived  him  and  the 
rest  of  his  Brethren.  He  Died  13th  June,  1704.  [Kcitli. 

Arthur  Boss  was  the  last  of  the  illustrious  line  of  Archbishops 
in  this   Sec  who  bore  the  Title,  among  whom  were  the   sons 

of  Kings  and  Nobles. 
So  says  Thomas  Ste 
phen  in  his  "  History 
of  the  Church  of  Scot 
land.'  '  But  they  were 
sons  of  Kings  and 
Nobles  begot  "  on  the 
wrong  side  of  the 
blanket."  Archbishop 
Boss  was  the  son  of 
Alexander  Boss  or 
Bose  of  Easter  Clune, 
in  the  Parish  of  Birse, 
Aberdeenshirc,  Par 
son  of  that  Parish, 
and  Chancellor  of  the 
Diocese  of  Aberdeen. 
This  Alexander,  the 
father  of  the  Arch 
bishop,  was  a  stout 
Anti-Covenanter.  His 

Field  filled  by  a  figure  of  a  Bishop  Mitred  and  Robed,  Bufferings  are  given 
holding  before  him  a  S,  Andrew's  Cross,  the  right  hand  in  a  Petition  (ill 
raised  in  Blessing;  over  the  figure  a  canopy.  On  Hie  ,1-1  i  •  11-1 

sides  the  Legend,  Sit  <  'hristo  suncis  wlor.    In  the  lower 

part  of  the  Seal,  a  Shield  bearing  a  chevron  cheque  John),  presented  by 
between  three  water-bougets ;  in  middle  chief,  a  rose,  his  graildsOHS,  John 
Above  the  Shield  a  Mitre  and  Mantling.  The  whole  p  c  i\r-  •  /  f 

encircled  by  the  Legend.      [J/,//y/.r  formerly  >K  Trinity  llOS&'        1V1] 
Collt'i/e,   (ncnnlnionil,   time  in   the  Anti<iii>irin)i   Jfuwttiit,   Foverail,     aild     Alex- 


ander    Boss,    Parson 
of  Perth,  afterwards  Bishop  Bose  of  Edinburgh.     Bishop  Keith 


AKTHUE  ROSS.  101 

does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware  of  the  relationship  between 
Archbishop  Ross  and  Bishop  Eose ;  but  Grub  alludes  to  it  in 
his  History  (vol.  hi.,  p.  278,  Note),  and  refers  to  the  "  Genea 
logical  Deduction  of  the  Family  of  Rose  of  Kilravock,"  525, 
Spalding  Chtl. 

"  (4.)  Mr.  John  Rose  of  Insh,  Minister  of  that  Parish.  This 
gentleman  had  two  sons,  viz.,  Mr.  Alexander  and  Mr.  Arthur. 
This  last,  viz.,  Mr.  Arthur  Rose,  was,  in  1075,  Consecrated 
Bishop  of  Argyle.  His  elder  brother  (5),  Mr.  Alexander  Rose, 
was  Parson  of  Monimusk,  and  was  father  of  two  Clergymen, 
viz.,  Mr.  John  and  Mr.  Alexander.  This  Mr.  Alexander  was 
for  some  years  one  of  the  Ministers  of  Perth ;  from  whence  he 
was  Translated  to  Glasgow,  and  was  made  Professor  of  Divinity 
in  that  University.  In  1080  he  was  Consecrated  Bishop  of 
Moray,  from  whence  he  was  Translated  to  Edinburgh,  in  1088. 
His  elder  brother  (0),  Mr.  John,  of  Insh,  was  Parson  of 
Foveran."  Tin'  Family  of  Hose  of  Kilravock,  Spalding  Club,  p. 
525.| 

The  Honourable  George  Rose,  of  the  Treasury,  was  of  the 
same  Family.  His  grandfather  was  Donald  Rose  of  Wester 
Clune,  in  Birse.  Alexander  Ross,  Author  of  "  Helenore,  or  the 
Fortunate  Shepherdess,''  a  Poem  in  the  broad  Scotch  dialect, 
was  also  one  of  the  Birse  Rosses. 

During  the  time  the  Archbishop  was  Minister  of  Kinerny,  at 
the  period  of  the  Restoration,  he  Signed  the  Declaration  of  the 
Synod  in  favour  of  the  re-establishment  of  the  ancient  Ecclesi 
astical  Polity.  He  was  made  Parson  of  Glasgow  in  1005,  in 
which  station  he  continued  till  1075,  when  he  was  promoted  to  the 
See  of  Argyll,  upon  the  Death  of  Bishop  William  Scrogie.  He 
was  Consecrated  at  Edinburgh  in  May  1075.  along  with  Bishop 
Paterson  for  Galloway,  by  Archbishop  Leighton  of  Glasgow, 
Bishop  Young  of  Edinburgh,  and  by  another  Bishop  whose  name 
is  not  mentioned.  I  Lair's  Memorialh,  4/o,  1818,  p.  77.]  He 
owned  his  appointment  as  "Parson  of  Glasgow"  to  his  Prede 
cessor  in  the  See.  The  Rev.  C.  J.  Lyon,  in  his  History  of  St. 
Andrews,  vol.  ii.,  p.  105,  says — "I  have  now  before  me  a  Copy 
of  a  Letter  addressed  to  him  when  Minister  of  Old  Deer,  in  the 


10-2          ARCHBISHOrS  OF  Till:  SFF  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

year  l(H>i,  by  ilu1  Into  Primate  .Burnet,  then  Archbishop  of  Glas 
gow,  offering  him  a  situation  in  that  City  of  i'1'200  Scots  per 
annum  :  for  which  ho  was  to  Preach  only  once*  every  Lord's-day, 
and  once  on  a  week  day,  unless  it  be  at  Communions,  or  some 
siu'h  extraordinary  occasions.  The  Archbishop  furtluT  evinces 
liis  good  opinion  of  him  hy  requesting  him  to  -  engage  some 
deserving  persons  to  come  this  way.  for  supplying  our  Vacancies, 
and  at  Meeting,  and  1  shall  study  to  provide  for  them  as  you 
think  their  parts  and  experience  do  deserve.'  1  have  also  a 
Copy  of  a  Peed  hy  the  Provost  and  IVan  of  (iuild  of  Glasgow, 
conferring  the  Freedom  of  their  City  upon  him  when  he  was 
Bishop  of  Argyll,  in  ](>7~>." 

According  to  ISurnot,  his  namesake  Pied  in  Scotland,  (hru 
'Tim*'*,  re/.  //.,  /'.  ()*2().  "  And  Uoss,  a  pi>or.  ignorant,  worthless 
man.  hut  in  whom  ohedieneo  and  fury  WCMV  so  emiiKMit  that  tlu^se 
suppliiul  all  other  defects,  was  raised  to  he  Primate  of  that 
Church  ;  which  was.  indeed,  a  sad  omen,  as  well  as  a  step  to  its 
fall  and  ruin."  It  required  no  strong  light  from  (iilhert's  Lamp 
of  Prophecy  to  foretell  ///,  when  he  knew  well  what  was  going 
on  behind  scenes. 

It  is  not  known  where  Archbishop  l\oss  resided  during  his 
latter  years,  after  he  was  outed  from  his  high  position.  .Pro 
bably  he  lived  and  Pied  in  Edinburgh  in  1701,  and  was  Pmried 
in  the  Churchyard  ot'.Hestalrig.  In  the  Canongate  Churchyard, 
near  the  north-west  corner  of  the  Church,  is  a  Stone  with  this 
Inscription  on  the  one  side — "  To  the  Memorv  of  (Joorgo 
Stuart  .Forbes,  Fsq.,  Representative  of  the  ancient  Family  of 
Brux,  and  his  spouse,  Margaret  Stewart,  only  daughter  of  Capt. 
John  Stewart,  I\.X..  a  Cadet  of  the  honourable  Family  of  l>al- 
lechin."  On  the  other  side  of  this  Tombstone  is — "  The  proper 
Buryiug-placo  of  this  Family  is  in  Hestalrig,  in  the  Tomb  of  his 
Grace  Arthur  l\oss,  last  Archbishop  and  Primate  in  Scotland, 
whose  great-grandson,  George  Stuart  Forbes,  here  interred  was; 
but  he,  having  Hied  suddenly  in  Edinburgh,  was  privately  interred 
here,  formerly  the  Hurying-place  of  the  Fglinton  family." 

Archbishop  l\oss'  daughter  Anne  Married,  in  1087,  John, 
fourth  Lord  Balmerino,  and  was  the  mother  of  Arthur,  sixth 


AKT11UK  i;u>S.  103 

Lord.  beheaded  on  Tower-Hill.  London,  in  1740.  with  the  Earl 
of  Kilmaniook. 

A  talo  about  a  Bishop  is  always  read.  Here  is  one  about 
our  Archbishop  :  - 

"About  two  miles  further  on.  I  pass'd  the  ruins  of  the  old 
Church  of  Kinernie  :  the  Parish  was  some  years  ago  united  to 
Midmar.  In  the  Reign  of  Charles  II..  Ross,  afterward  Archbishop 
of  St.  Andrews,  was  Minister  here  :  but.  being  somewhat  of  the 
nature  of  Pharaoh's  butler  when  exalted,  he  did  not  remember 
his  brethren.  It  was.  however,  very  natural  to  suppose  that  one 
who  had  felt  the  inconvenience  of  a  small  Stipend  himself,  would 
be  ready  to  lend  every  reasonable  aid  to  have  his  successors 
bettered  :  and  upon  this  rational  presumption  the  Minister  of 
Kinernie  reckoned  upon  the  interest  of  his  Metropolitan,  in  his 
intended  application  tor  an  augmentation  of  his  Living. 

"  He  waited  upon  the  Primate,  and  laid  the  case  before  him. 
•You  Country  Clergymen.'  said  the  Bishop,  'should  learn  to 
moderate  your  desires.  I  know  what  it  is  to  live  in  the  Country. 
When  I  was  Minister  of  your  Parish.  I  could  afford  a  bottle  of 
good  malt  liquor,  and  a  roasted  fowl  for  my  Sunday's  dinner  ; 
and  I  see  not  to  what  further  you  are  entitled.'  The  rural  Priest 
made  his  bow,  and  retired  with  this  parting  compliment  —  '  It 
would  have  been  no  great  loss  to  the  Church  of  Scotland,  though 
your  Grace  had  been  yet  eating  roasted  hens  at  Kinernie." 
/•';•<///('/.<  l><'>u<il<tx'  Description  of  (he  Ea*t  Const  of  Scotland  i  l\iis- 
/</.  1782,  '2  .-):]. 


]t'  (in  A}>i''iu-iti»>i  irltich  ir,!*  .<//<'</  M  hare  b<\-n  xf,-n   in  the   ILm.-ie  ft  Arch- 
p   /i'ox.N-,  il<-*<'ri/'<-'l   in  it    Letter  (-I   the   U,r.  Jnhn    \\~iinlen,   and  b>j  him 
U'd  M  the  Her.  H^l'ei't  11  "tlroir. 


l\ev.  Sir.  —  I  mind  some  time  ago  I  hail  the  occasion  to  converse  with 
you  anont  sunie  thing  which  fell  out  in  that  house  in  St.  Andrews  where 
Bishop  Ross  lodged,  which  is  as  followeth  :  — 

Andrew  Uerrage.  my  wife's  brother,  principell  servant  at  that  time  to 
the  Bishop,  a  young  man  who  was  verie  apt  to  crush  anie  surmise  of  aperi- 
tions  before  that  time.  Andrew  Berrage  told  me  and  his  sister  that  there 
is  a  chamber  in  that  lodging  possest  then  by  the  Bishop;  that  neither  family 
nor  stranger  lay  in  that  rooine.  by  reason  of  aue  ould  suspitioii  of  aperitions 
that  frequented  that  roome.  It  fell  out  there  comes  so  many  strangers  one 
day,  that  all  the  other  roonies  was  taken  up  with  the  strangers  except  that 


104  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

suspected  roomc.  My  brother-in-law,  indcvoring  to  banish  such  a  Himcra 
(as  he  called  it)  out  of  the  family,  prevails  with  the  paigc,  a  young  lad,  that 
both  should  ly  together  in  that  roomc  ;  and  accordingly  set  on  a  good  fire 
in  the  chamber,  the  bed  being  ncere  to  the  middle  of  the  roomc.  My 
brother-in-law  lies  down  with  his  face  towards  the  (lore,  the  paige  with  his 
back  to  his,  which  obliged  the  one  to  loke  to  one  end  of  the  chamber,  and 
the  other  to  the  other  end  of  the  chamber. 

About  the  middle  of  the  night  [comes!  ane  aperition  of  the  coatclmian 
at  the  cntric  of  the  chamber  where  my  brother's  face  was  pointing ;  at  the 
same  time,  the  postilinc  appears  at  the  other  end  of  the  chamber.  My 
brother  and  the  paigc  being  both  awake,  the  coatchman  advances  towards 
my  brother  in  the  foreside  of  the  bed.  My  brother  fals  a  scowldiiig  of  the 
coatchman,  calling  him  drunken  rascall,  questioning  him  why  he  was  not  in 
bed  ere  this  time.  The  aperition  still  advances  towards  him  till  it  comes 
closs  to  the  bed,  and  the  other  aperition  in  the  back  side  of  the  bed  advances 
towards  the  paige  ;  the  paigc  all  the  time  smyling  at  my  brother  taking,  as 
he  thought  all  the  time,  the  coatchman  for  the  postilinc  that  advanced 
towards  him.  My  brother-in-law  riscth  on  his  elbow,  and  swears  he  would 
ding  the  devill  out  of  the  coatchman,  and  thrusts  at  him  with  a  full  stroake, 
till  he  secth  his  arme  through  the  aperition,  and  his  hand  on  the  other  side 
of  him.  After  the  thrust  at  the  aperition,  the  coachman  and  postilinc  each 
of  them  went  back  to  each  end  of  the  roomc  and  disappeared  like  smoak. 
Then,  he  said,  instead  of  cursing  he  fell  a  praying ;  then  touches  the  paige, 
asking  him  if  he  was  waking,  who  answered,  "  Yes."  "  Saw  you  the  coatch 
man  ?"  said  he  ;  who  answered,  "  I  saw  the  postilinc." 

After  some  conference  betwixt  them,  they  fand  that  their  backs  being 
towards  other  in  the  bed,  and  accordingly  their  faces  looking  to  each  end  of 
the  chamber,  declaim!  to  each  other  what  they  saw  as  above.  They 
instantly  arose  and  sat  at  the  fire  till  the  morning,  taking  wan  another 
ingaged  not  to  devilge  what  they  saw,  for  frightning  the  rest  of  the  servants. 

However,  the  secret  breaks  out,  and  comes  to  Bishop  Eoss  his  cars,  who 
industeruslie  laboured  to  desuad  his  servants,  and  for  proof  thereof  he  would 
ly  in  that  chamber  alon.  His  servant  saves  to  him,  in  a  jocking  manner, 
"  My  Lord,  alow  me  to  be  in  the  chamber  below  your  Lordship."  The  fire 
is  put  on,  candcls  placed  on  the  table,  and  in  a  little  time  his  Lordship  goes 
to  bed.  My  brother  and  paige  sets  up  in  the  roome  below  him.  About  the 
middle  of  the  night,  the  Bishop  comes  down  stairs  with  all  sped  possible, 
and  thought  it  convenient  to  bring  no  thing  with  him  but  his  shirt,  bare 
footed,  calling  for  his  servants  ;  but  what  he  saw  he  would  reveal  it  to  non. 

Sir,  this  is  the  rcall  Account  my  wife  and  I  had  from  her  brother's 
mouth ;  and  next  to  seeing  it  myself,  I  could  confirme  it  no  better. 

My  dewtiful  service  to  you,  your  wife,  and  family.     Your  ain, 

THO.  HARLAW.* 
Alloa,  14th  January,  1718. 


::  "Private   Letters"  addressed  to   Mr.  Wodrow,  p.   18,    Advocate's   Library, 
Printed  but  not  Published. 


THE  REVOLUTION.  105 


THE    REVOLUTION. 

(From  a  MS.  by  Bishop  Rattray,  Transcribed  by  Bishop  Jolly  from  a  Copy  in  the 
handicritiny  of  Bishop  Alexander  of  AUoa.j 

AFTER  Episcopacy  was  abolished,  as  to  its  legal  Establishment,  at  the 
Revolution,  the  Bishops,  it  seems,  found  it  impracticable  to  supply  the 
Churches  or  Dioceses  with  new  Bishops,  as  they  fell  vacant  by  the  Death  of 
any  of  their  own  number ;  but  the  Inspection  of  these  Dioceses,  at  least 
within  the  Provinces  of  St.  Andrews,  fell  to  the  charge  of  the  Archbishop 
thereof  during  his  lifetime  (if  any  were  then  vacant),  and  after  his  Decease, 
wch  happened  June  13th,  1704,  to  the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh,  as  Vicar  of  that 
Metropolitical  Sec. 

Thus  things  continued  till  the  year  1705,  that  all  the  Bishops  being 
now  dead — except  Paterson,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow ;  Rose,  Bishop  of  Edin 
burgh  ;  Haliburton,  Bishop  of  Aberdeen  ;  and  Douglas,  Bishop  of  Dumblane 
—it  was  thought  necessary  to  take  care  of  the  Succession,  and  not  to  suffer 
the  Order  of  Bishops  to  be  extinguished  among  us,  that  we  might  not  be  put 
to  the  necessity  and  hazard  of  having  recourse  to  the  Bishops  of  other 
Churches  for  new  Consecrations,  and  of  depending  upon  their  good  will 
whether  and  on  what  terms  we  should  have  a  Church  preserved  to  us.  With 
this  only  view,  therefore,  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Sage  and  Mr.  John  Fullarton 
were  then  Consecrated  Bishops  at  Edr,  on  S.  Paul's  Day,  Janry.  25,  1705,  by 
the  Archbishop  of  Glasgow  and  the  Bishops  of  Edr  and  Dumblane.  And 
after  the  Death  of  the  Archbishop,  wch  happened  Deer.  9th,  1708,  that  they 
might  not  run  too  near  to  the  number  required  by  the  Canons  of  the  Church 
for  Consecration,  in  case  any  accident  should  happen  by  the  Sickness  or 
Death  of  two  of  them  together,  especially  being,  as  themselves  express  it, 
in  the  Diplomat  a  or  Instruments  of  Consecration  given  by  them,  almost 
quite  worn  out  with  manifold  cares,  diseases,  and  old  age — (multiplicibus 
curis,  morbis,  atque  ingravescente  senis  tantum  non  confectes) — for  this 
reason,  I  say,  they  Consecrated  two  more,  viz.,  Mr.  John  Falconer  and  Mr. 
Henry  Chrystie.  This  was  done  at  Dundee  on  the  28th  day  of  April,  in  the 


100 


PRESERVATION  OF  EPISCOPAL  SUCCESSION. 


year  1709,  by  the  Bishop  of  Edr,  assisted  by  the  Bishop  of  Dunblane  and 

Bishop  Sage. 

And  here  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  in  the  Consecration  of  these  two,  as 
well  as  of  the  two  former  Bishops,  Haliburton  of  Ab<Mhu  still  alive,  was  no 
ways  concurring ;  nor  indeed  was  he  consulted,  or  so  much  as  made  privy 
to  them.     This,  if  their  Consecration  had  been  designed  to  give  them  any 
immediate   Jurisdiction   in  this   National   Church,   or  to   entitle  them  to 
decisive  Votes  in  its  Councils  or  Synods,  would  have  been  a  step  altogether 
unjustifiable,  and  repugnant  to  the  Niccne  and  other  ancient  Canons  of  the 
Church.     But  as  their  design  was  only  to  preserve  the  Order  (as  I  have  said 
above),  they  thought  that  a  valid  Consecration  by  any  three  Catholic  Bishops 
was  sufficient  for  this  purpose  ;  and  intending,  on  prudential  considerations, 
to  keep  their  new  Consecrations  as  much  a  secret  as  possible,  they  knew  the 
weakness  that  attended  that  Bishop,  at  least  in  his  old  age,  too  well  to 
intrust  it  with  him.     This  I  have  been  oftener  than  once  told  by  one  of  the 
Bishops  themselves,  then  Consecrated  (Bishop  Falconer),  and  indeed  the 
thing  sufficiently  proves  itself;   for,  had  it  not  been  on  this  account,  what 
reason  can  be  given  why  they  should  not  have  preferred  the  Bishop  of  Aber 
deen  to  be  one  of  the  Consccrators,  who  was   a  Diocesan  Bishop  of  this 
Church,  legally  established  in  his  See  before  the  Revolution,  to  Mr.  Sage, 
who  had  been  but  lately  Consecrated  a  Bishop,  only  at  large  himself,  and 
that,  without  any  Designation  to  any  Diocese,  in  the  most  private  manner. 
That  this  Preservation  of  the  Order,  and  not  any  Jurisdiction  over  this 
Church,  which  could  never  have  been  given  to  Bishops  at  large,  consistently 
with  the  Canons  and  Discipline  of  the  Church  Catholick,  was  all  that  was 
intended  by  them  in  these  Consecrations,  is  evident  likewise  from  the  very 
tenor  of  their  Instruments  of  Consecration,  in  one  of  wch  now  lying  before 
me,  and  written  with  Mr.  Sage's. own  hand,  immediately  after  the  words 
above  cited,  follows:   Qua  propter,  ex  eo  quod  Deo,  Supremo   Servatori 
nostro,  Sacrosanctie  ejus  Ecclesia?,  et  Posteris  debemus,  in  Animum  induxi- 
mus,    Officium,    Characterem,    et    Facultatem   Episcopalem    aliis    probis, 
fidelibus,  ad  docendum  et  regendum  idoneis  Hominibus  committere.     Here 
you  see  that  the  very  reason  wch  moved  them  to  make  these  new  Consecra 
tions  was,  that  the  most  part  of  their  Colleagues  being  dead— (plerosque 
Fratrum  nostrorum  carissimorum  et  in  Collegio  Episcopali  Collegarum  in 
Domino  obdormiisse)— and   the  few  of  them  that  were   remaining— (per 
paucos  qui  Divina  Misericordia  superstites  sumus) — almost  quite  worn  out 
w1  manifold  cares,  diseases,  and  old  age,  they  thought  that  their  duty  to 
God  obliged  them  to  provide  for  his  Church  and  for  Posterity,  by  Consecrat- 


BISHOPS  OF  NO  SPECIAL  DIOCESES.  107 

ing  persons  to  the  Episcopal  character,  who  might  keep  up  a  Succession  of 
Bishops  among  us  ;  that  they  should  be,  «<l  docctulntn  ct  reyeiulinu  hlonci,  was  no 
more  than  what  the  dignity  of  that  character  committed  to  them  necessarily 
required ;  besides  that  it  made  them  the  most  likely  Candidates  for  being 
chosen  to  be  Bishops  of  particular  Dioceses  or  Districts,  by  a  regular  or  Cano 
nical  Election,  when  the  circumstances  of  the  Church  should  make  it  proper 
or  necessary ;  and  thereby  of  having  the  Government  and  Jurisdiction  of  these 
Districts,  and  in  consequence  ail  interest  also  in  that  of  the  National  or 
Provincial  Church  to  which  they  belong,  committed  to  them  ;  and  therefore, 
whenever  this  might  happen,  it  was  necessary  they  should  be  qualified  for  it. 
In  a  Letter  of  the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh  to  Mr.  Falconar,  before  his  Conse 
cration,  he  says — •"  I  doubt  not  but  that  you,  w1  many  others,  have  been 
laying  the  afflicted  state  of  our  desolate  Church  to  heart,  and  yet  likely  to 
fall  under  a  farther  desolation  by  the  failure  of  our  Order,  if  some  speedy 
course  be  not  taken  to  prevent  the  same  ;  "  and  then,  having  intimated  their 
design  of  Consecrating  him,  and  having  barred  all  excuses  from  modesty  or 
otherwise,  he  adds — "  So,  I  beseech  you  not  to  interpose  delays,  which  are 
not  sufferable  in  our  present  case  ;  but  that  you  yield  a  ready  compliance  in 
what  is  both  necessary  and  indispensable."  Thus  it  is  plain  from  the  whole 
circumstances  of  these  Consecrations  that  all  that  was  intended  by  them 
was  to  preserve  a  Succession,  and  not  to  entitle  them  to  any  Jurisdiction  in 
the  Church,  wch  they  could  not  possibly  imagine  would  be  conferred  by  Con 
secration  alone.  But  this  will  still  farther  appear  from  what  is  to  be  said 
afterwards.  Having  now  six  Bishops  in  all  (for  they  did  not  reckon  on  the 
Bishop  of  Aberdeen,  whom  they  could  not  trust  wl  the  secret),  they  had  no 
farther  thoughts  of  adding  any  more  to  their  number,  till  the  Death  of  some 
of  them  should  make  it  necessary. 

On  the  7th  of  June,  1711,  the  R1 11(l  and  Learned  Bishop  Sage  departed 
this  life,  and  soon  after  his  Death  the  Honourable  Mr.  Campbell  came  down 
from  London.  I  find  by  a  Letter  of  the  Bishop  of  Edr,  dated  July  2d,  1711, 
that  he  expected  him  at  Edr  in  20  days  after,  according  to  a  Letter  he  had 
received  from  him  the  Post  before,  and  he  says  in  this  Letter,  Mr.  Campbel 
was  to  be  altogether  incognito ;  and  he  was  Consecrated  at  Dundee,  August 
25th,  in  the  same  year  1711,  by  the  Bishop  of  Edr,  the  Bishop  of  Dunblane, 
and  Bishop  Falconer — Bishop  Haliburton  of  Abd  being  still  alive,  and  not 
so  much  as  acquainted  w1  it.  This  was  done  upon  the  recommendation 
and  at  the  earnest  desire  of  the  E4  Ed  Bishop  Hickes,  whose  design  therein, 
no  doubt,  was  that  he  might  be  assistant  to  them  at  London,  whether  he 
returned  after  his  Consecration,  and  hath  remained  there  ever  since.  But 


108  BISHOPS  CH11YSTIE  AND  FALCONAE. 

Bishop  Campbell's  Consecration  was  not  alone  sufficient  for  their  purpose 
in  England,  and  therefore  the  Bishop  of  Edr  was  prevailed  on  by  their 
sollicitation  to  send  up  Bishop  Falconer  to  London,  in  the  end  of  the  year 
1711,  in  order  to  Consecrate  the  11 d  Mr.  James  Gadderar,  who  was  well 
known  to  and  much  csteem'd  by  him;  and  accordingly  he  was  Consecrated 
there  on  the  21th  day  of  February,  1711-12,  by  Bishop  Falconar,  Bishop 
Campbell,  and  Bishop  Hickes. 

In  the  month  of  May,  1718,  Bishop  Chrystie  Died  at  Kinross ;  and  the 
Bishop  of  Edr,  considering  that  there  were  now  only  two  Bishops  within  the 
Kingdom  besides  himself,  viz.,  Bishop  Fullartoun  and  Bishop  Falconar  (for 
the  Bishop  of  Dunblane  and  the  Bishop  of  Aberdeen  were  both  dead  before 
this  time,  and  the  two  in  England  were  by  their  circumstances  confined  to 
live  at  London,  and  could  not  easily  undertake  so  long  and  expensive  a 
journey  as  to  come  down  to  Scotland  on  any  sudden  emergency  that  might 
require  it),  did  judge  it  necessary  to  Consecrate  other  two  Bishops,  that,  in 
case  of  his  own  Death,  there  might  be  four  Bishops  within  the  Kingdom, 
wch  he  thought  as  small  a  number  as  he  could  safely  trust  to,  for  the  preser 
vation  of  the  Succession;  and  accordingly  on  the  22d  of  October,  1718,  he 
Consecrated  Mr.  William  Irvine  and  Mr.  Arthur  Millar  at  Ed1',  being  assisted 
by  the  forementioned  Bishops  Fullarton  and  Falconar. 

Thus  I  have  laid  before  the  Reader  a  plain  and  simple  Account  of  all 
the  Consecrations  made  in  the  Church,  from  the  Eevolution  till  the  Death  of 
the  Bishop  of  Ed1'.  Now,  till  about  the  year  1712,  these  new  Consecrated 
Bishops  kept  their  character  very  secret,  so  as  that  few  or  none,  except  of  their 
most  intimate  friends,  knew  any  thing  of  it.  At  length  Bishop  Falcouar, 
observing  the  great  neglect  of  the  sacred  Ordinance  of  Confirmation  in  the 
Country  places,  occasioned  chiefly  by  their  not  having  a  Bishop  at  hand  to 
apply  to,  thought  it  hard,  and  what  he  could  not  well  answer  to  God  for, 
not  to  afford  them  that  assistance  herein  wch  his  station  enabled  him  to  do, 
and  therefore  began  to  act  a  little  more  openly  in  this  matter,  that  probably 
others  of  his  Brethren  might  herein  follow  his  example.  But  they  never 
attempted  to  Ordain  any  Clergyman,  or  perform  any  Act  wch  implied  Juris 
diction,  but  by  the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh's  special  desire  or  permission. 
Thus,  when  the  people  of  St.  Andrews  wrere  in  want  of  a  Presbyter  to 
officiate  among  them,  and  were  desirous  that  one  Mr.  James  Morrice  should 
be  put  in  Orders  for  that  purpose,  Bishop  Falconar,  tho  living  within  four 
miles  of  the  place,  would  not  meddle  in  it  till  he  wrote  to  the  Bishop  of 
Edr,  and  had  a  Letter  from  him  desiring  him  to  do  it,  which  Letter  is  still 
extant,  as  are  likewise  some  others  from  the  same  Bishop  to  him,  of  the  like 


THE  BISHOP  OF  EDINBURGH  YJLCAlt  GENERAL.         109 

nature  ;  particularly  one,  wherein,  understanding  that  he  was  going  to  the 
North  to  visit  his  friends  there,  he  desires  him  to  put  a  person,  Mr.  Patrick 
Maitlaud,  recommended  to  him  from  that  Country,  into  Deacon's  Orders, 
and  says  he  hopes  to  be  able  to  put  him  into  Priest's  Orders  himself,  when 
that  shall  be  necessary ;  and  he  earnestly  intreats  him  to  employ  himself  in 
all  the  necessary  offices  respecting  the  Churche's  good,  and  belonging  to  his 
character,  in  that  Country,  where,  says  he,  there  is  much  need  of  such  an 
one  as  you.  Nay,  even  the  Bishop  of  Dunblane,  when  he  lived  at  Dundee, 
would  not  Ordain  any  person  out  of  his  own  Diocese,  but  as  desired  to  do  it 
by  the  Bishop  of  Edr.  "\Vc  have  an  instance  of  this  in  the  case  of  Mr. 
Robert  White,  who,  upon  a  Vacancy  at  Essie,  was  chosen  by  those  concerned 
there  to  that  Charge.  But  this  good  Bishop  did  not  meddle  w*  his  Ordina 
tion,  tin)  he  lived  in  the  same  Town  wl  him,  till  he  had  the  Bishop  of  Edr's 
Letter  recommending  it  to  him.  Bishop  Falconar  happening  at  that  time 
to  come  to  Dundee,  he  shewed  him  the  Letter,  and  intreated  him  to  take  a 
part  in  it,  by  Ordaining  him  Deacon,  after  which  he  himself  should  put  him 
into  Priest's  Orders  ;  but  he  refused  this,  saying  he  had  no  Title  to  act  in  it, 
and  that  the  Order  not  being  directed  to  him,  he  could  not  regularly  do  it. 
And  tho  he  yielded  at  length  to  his  importunity,  yet  it  was  only  on  his 
promising  to  write  an  Account  of  it  to  the  Bishop  of  Ed1',  and  to  take  all  the 
blame  of  that  irregularity  upon  himself.  But  that  the  Bishop  of  Edr,  after 
the  Death  of  the  other  local  Bishops  (to  which  icni  the  several  instances 
above  mentioned  are  to  be  referred),  kept  the  sole  power  of  governing  the 
National  Church  in  his  own  hands,  and  that  the  Clergy  and  people  through 
out  the  whole  Kingdom  still  applied  to  him  as  to  their  Ordinary,  is  a  thing 
too  well  known,  and  too  recent  in  everybody's  memory,  for  any  person  to 
pretend  to  call  it  in  question. 

Let  us  now,  before  we  proceed  farther,  look  back  to  the  state  of  this 
Church  w1  respect  to  Publick  Worship,  preceding  this  period  of  the  Bishop 
of  Edr's  Death,  which,  indeed,  at  the  Revolution,  and  for  a  long  time  after, 
was  very  lamentable,  and  such  as  scarcely  deserved  that  name  ;  for  we 
had  no  such  thing  as  any  Offices  or  Liturgie  used  among  us.  The  method 
in  our  ordinary  Assemblies  on  the  Lord's-day  was  almost  the  same  with 
that  of  the  Presbyterians,  beginning  w*  singing  a  stanza  or  two  of  the  Metre 
Psalms,  after  wcb  followed  an  extemporary  Prayer,  during  which,  as  well  as 
at  singing  of  the  Psalms,  most  of  the  Congregation  sat  irreverently  on  their 
breech,  only  they  were  uncovered.  Then  came  a  long  Sermon,  the  text  of 
which  was  no  sooner  read  but  most  of  the  people  put  on  their  hats  and 
bonnets.  After  the  Sermon  followed  another  extemporary  Prayer,  at  the 


110  DISMAL  STATE  OF  PUBLIC  WORSHIP. 

conclusion  of  wdl  they  said  the  Lord's  Prayer,  then  another  stanza  or  two 
of  the  Metre  Psalms,  wch  they  concluded  w*  a  Doxology  ;  but  the  people  sat 
likewise  during  all  the  time  of  this  last  Prayer  and  Psalms,  in  the 'same 
manner  as  in  those  before  Sermon,  only  they  rose  up  at  the  Doxology,  tho 
some  thought  even  that  too  superstitious  ;  whether  they  generally  stood  up 
at  the  Lord's  Prayer  I  am  not  so  certain.  After  the  Doxology,  the  Congrega 
tion  was  dismissed  with  the  Blessing  ;  but  indeed  most  of  them  did  not  wait 
for  it,  for  all  the  time  it  was  a  pronouncing  they  were  running  out  of  Church 
like  so  many  sheep  breaking  out  of  a  fold,  in  the  greatest  hurry  and  confusion. 
Nay,  from  the  time  the  Sermon  was  ended,  the  people,  in  many  places  at 
least,  began  gradually  to  drop  out  ;  for,  in  truth,  the  hearing  of  it  was  the 
only  design  they  had  in  coming  to  Church,  and  that  wherein  they  placed  all 
Publick  Worship  ;  tho,  properly  speaking,  it  be  not  so  much  as  a  part 
thereof,  being  intended  only  for  instructing  the  people  in  their  duty,  or 
exhorting  them  to  the  performance  of  it,  to  whom  therefore  it  is  directed, 
whereas  all  Worship  must  be  directed  to  (loci  only.  And  even  for  their 
instruction  it  is  plain  in  itself,  and  experience  too  sadly  confirms  it,  that 
Sermons  can  be  of  little  use  to  such  as  have  not  been  before  duly  catechised 
in  the  fundamental  principles  of  our  Holy  Religion  ;  and  for  this  we  gen 
erally  made  use  of  no  other  Catechism  but  that  of  the  Westminster 
Assembly,  the  unfitness  of  -\vch  to  this  end  is  so  well  known  to  all  men  of 
sound  principles,  that  I  need  not  insist  on  it. 

The  Holy  Eucharist  was  not  Celebrated  in  most  places  at  least  above 
once  a  year,  if  so  often,  and  their  method  of  doing  it  differed  also  very  little 
from  that  of  the  Presbyterians  ;  for  they  had  their  Preparation  Sermon  (as 
they  call  it)  the  day  before,  their  Action  Sermon  on  the  clay  itself,  besides 
their  Discourses  at  the  Serving  of  the  Tables;  for  they  had  long  tables 
placed  in  the  Church,  on  each  side  of  wch  the  people  sat  as  if  it  had  been  at 
a  common  meal,  and  handed  about  the  Elements  from  one  to  another, 
whilst  the  attending  Elders  shoved  the  plate  wl  the  Consecrated  Bread  along 
the  table  for  their  greater  conveniency,  during  wcb  time  a  Presbyter  was  still 
discoursing  to  them ;  only  after  each  table  was  served,  while  they  who  had 
Communicated  were  removing  and  others  planting  themselves  again  about 
it,  a  stanza  of  a  Psalm  was  sung;  and  on  the  day  after  they  had  their 
Thanksgiving  Sermon.  All  this  work  of  Preparation,  Action,  and  Thanks 
giving  Sermons  and  Discourses  at  Serving  the  Tables,  for  these  Avere  the 
phrases  used  by  them,  as  well  as  by  the  Presbyterians,  obliged  them  like 
wise  to  take  the  assistance  of  two  or  three  Presbyters  from  the  neighbouring 
Parishes,  only  they  did  not  call  so  many  as  the  Presbyterians  do,  who  have 


EPISCOPAL  EXTEMPORE  PRAYEES.  Ill 

two  or  three  Sermons  going  on  together,  one  in  the  Church,  and  others  in 
the  Church  yard,  or  open  fields,  where  the  Sermons  continue  from  morning 
till  night,  the  Preachers  still  succeeding  one  another ;  nor  did  the  Presby 
ters  who  came  to  assist  bring  the  people  of  their  Parishes  along  with  them, 
far  less  did  people  convene  from  far  distant  places  as  it  were  to  a  Fair  or 
Mercat,  not  to  Communicate  but  to  be  hearers  of  the  Sermons  only,  as  is 
now  done  among  the  Presbyterians  on  these  Occasions,  as  they  call  them.  As 
for  the  Consecration,  that  was  performed  by  an  extemporary  Prayer,  which, 
how  defective  it  must  frequently  have  been  may  be  easily  judged,  consider 
ing  that  many  of  them  had  no  notion  of  Its  being  the  Sacrifice  of  the 
Christian  Church ;  only  they  repeated  indeed  the  Words  of  the  history  of  the 
Institution.  And  th<">  they  might  proportion  the  Bread  at  first  to  the  number 
of  Communicants  before  Consecration ;  yet  at  least  in  many  places  they 
generally  Consecrated  but  a  small  part  of  the  Wine,  and  when  it  was 
exhausted,  they  had  a  little  barrel  or  some  other  such  vessel  at  hand,  from 
wch  they  filled  more,  and  streiglit  used  it  wknit  any  Consecration  at  all. 
And  as  for  the  Sacred  Ordinance  of  Confirmation,  which  the  Primitive  and 
Catholick  Church  always  looked  on  as  so  very  necessary  for  conferring  the 
Holy  Spirit  on  such  as  had  received  the  Baptism  of  Water,  it  was  not  at  all 
used  by  us.  This  so  great  affinity  betwixt  us  and  the  Presbyterians  as  to 
what  respected  Publick  Worship,  if  I  may  call  what  is  ordinarily  transacted 
in  our  Lord's-days'  Assemblies  by  that  name  ;  for,  in  truth,  the  proper 
Worship  of  the  Christian  Church,  the  Worship  of  the  faithful,  is,  as  it  was 
always  believed  to  be  in  the  primitive  ages,  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Holy 
Eucharist,  which  therefore  was  then  never  omitted  in  their  Publick  As 
semblies,  every  Lord's-day  at  least.  This  so  great  affinity  to  them,  I  say, 
was  without  doubt  the  reason  why  our  people  so  generally  joined  w*  the 
Presbyterians  in  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  or,  as  they  expressed  it, 
went  to  the  Kirk  to  hear  them  ;  as  perceiving  no  other  difference  from  what 
they  had  been  formerly  used  to,  save  only  in  the  omission  of  the  Lord's 
Prayer  and  the  Doxology,  at  the  times  I  have  formerly  mentioned ;  which, 
had  the  Presbyterians  been  so  wise  as  to  have  continued,  their  harvests  had 
probably  been  still  greater ;  for  the  Divine  right  of  Episcopacy,  and  the 
necessity  of  an  Ordination  by  Bishops  for  conferring  the  Sacerdotal  Powers, 
was  then  very  little  known  among  our  Laity,  perhaps  not  by  several  of  our 
Clergy  themselves.  Tho  all  this  which  I  have  now  described,  notwithstand 
ing  we  had  all  along  some  men  of  good  learning  among  us,  who  had  studied 
the  Ancients  and  payed  a  just  deference  to  the  judgment  and  testimony  of 
the  Primitive  Church  ;  but  as  this  was  a  study  too  much  neglected,  most  of 


112  THE  REV.  MR.  NOME'S  NOTIONS. 

them  taking  up  only  with  the  Systematical  Divinity,  all  that  these  could  do 
was  to  regrate  what  they  had  not  sufficient  power  to  help. 

In  this  deplorable  state  we  continued  till  about  the  year  1707  or  1708, 
only  the  English  Common  Prayer  Book  had  been  used  in  some  private 
families  before,  almost  from  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution ;  but  about 
that  time  it  began  to  be  introduced  into  our  more  Publick  Assemblies ;  and 
as  the  Gentry  and  people  of  better  fashion  were  generally  zealous  in  promot- 
in"  it,  so  it  came  to  take  very  soon  with  our  commons  also;  only  some  few 
of  our  older  Clergy  shewed  some  backwardness  to  it,  as  looking  upon  every 
alteration  from  what  they  had  been  accustomed  to,  how  much  soever  to  the 
better,  as  a  culpable  innovation.     Of  this  there  was  a  remarkable  instance 
at  Dundee,  where  the  most  of  the  considerable  Citizens  of  our  Communion, 
together  wf  scverals  of  the  Gentry  who  then  lived  in  Town,  were  very  keen 
to  have  it  brought  in  ;  yet  Mr.  Norie,  the  first  Presbyter  of  that  place,  and 
whom  we  shall  have  occasion  to  mention  afterwards,  opposed  it  all  he  could, 
and,  as  I  am  credibly  informed,  even  Preached  against  it.     However,  they 
persisted  stedfastly  in  their  resolution,  and  after  several  Meetings  and  Con 
ferences  wl  him  about  it  to  no  purpose,  they  at  length  plainly  told  him  that 
if  he  would  not  agree  to  their  design,  wch  his  reasonings  seemed  to  imply  he 
was  not  at  freedom  to  do,  they  would  call  a  third  Clergyman  to  read  Prayers 
for  them  ;  but  that  to  prevent  any  division,  and  that  they  might  not  inter 
fere  wt  one  another  in  that  case,  the  Prayers  should  be  begun  so  early  on 
the  Lord's  day  as  to  be  over  before  his  usual  hour  of  meeting,  which  all  of 
them  should  likewise  attend.     And  so  they  left  it  to  be  considered  of  by  him 
and  his  Collegue,  who  joined  with  him  in  this  refusal,  not  out  of  principle  or 
inclination,  for  he  had  been  among  the  first  in  this  Kingdom  who  had 
used  them  in  a  family  where  he  was   Chaplain,  but  through   a  slavish 
obsequiousness  to  Mr.  Norie,  and  for  fear  of  offending  him.     This  proposal 
of  a  third  Clergyman,  wch  they  had  good  ground  to  believe  the  Bishop  of 
Edr  would  have  granted  them,  if  it  should  have  been  found  necessary,  for 
they  had  acted  all  along  by  Mr.  Sage's  advice,  with  whom  one  of  their 
number  kept  a  Correspondence,  and  he  being  then  at  Edr,  by  him  under 
stood  that  Bishop's  sentiments  ;  this  proposal,  I  say,  at  first  stunn'd  Mr. 
Norie  and  his  Collegue  ;  but  when  they  came  to  reflect  on  it,  they  reckoned 
they  might  make  a  handle  of  it  for  inducing  several  people  to  stand  by  them 
in  opposing  the  introduction  of  the  Common  Prayers  ;  and  accordingly  they 
run  about  representing  it  as  a  design  formed  against  their  interest,  and  for 
breaking  and  dividing  their  Congregation,  and  earnestly  obtested  such  as 
they  thought  they  could  have  any  influence  on,  to  appear  against  it  at  the 


HIS  CHANGE  OF  MIND.  113 

next  meeting,  as  they  had  any  regard  for  them  or  for  the  preservation  of 
peace  and  unity — a  pretext  which  they  who  set  themselves  in  opposition  to 
any  wise  and  good  designs,  for  rectifying  what  may  be  amiss  or  defective, 
never  fail  to  make  use  of  when  they  .find  themselves  at  a  loss  as  to  the 
merits  of  the  cause.  Bur.  neither  by  this,  nor  by  all  their  other  practices, 
could  they  ever  prevail  wt  any  to  declare  against  the  Common  Prayers  :  only 
they  got  two  to  promise  that  they  should,  at  the  ensuing  meeting,  stand  up 
against  introducing  them  at  that  time  and  in  the  manner  proposed,  and 
accordingly  they  did  so  ;  but  before  the  meeting  broke  up,  they  found  them 
selves,  to  their  great  surprise,  deserted  both  by  Mr.  Norie  and  his  Colleague, 
which  bad  treatment  of  them,  as  they  supposed,  they  very  much  resented 
for  a  long  time  after. 

This  sudden  change  was  thus  brought  about.  The  Managers  and  others 
concerned  in  this  matter  being,  as  T  have  said,  very  well  informed  by  Mr. 
Sage  of  the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh's  inclinations  to  favour  their  design,  had 
before  urged  Mr.  Norie  to  write  to  him  for  his  advice  and  directions  about 
it,  which,  tho  at  their  importunity  he  had  once  condescended  to  do,  yet  he 
still  delayed,  and  at  last  flatly  refused.  Whereupon  they  wrote  again  to  Mr. 
Sage,  and  by  his  means  procured  a  Letter  from  the  Bishop  of  Edr  to  Mr. 
Norie.  This  Letter  was  put  into  his  hands  when  he  was  at  this  meeting; 
what  were  the  contents  of  it  we  are  only  left  to  guess  :  but  after  reading  it 
by  himself,  and  communicating  it  to  his  Colleague,  his  warmth  sensibly 
abated.  He  began  to  speak  softly  of  the  Common  Prayers,  and  after  having 
faintly  expressed  a  fear  thai  it  would  occasion  some  to  fall  ofT  from  them, 
he  at  length  condescended  to  the  introducing  of  them,  only  he  desired  that 
another  might  be  employed  to  begin  them  ;  which  was  agreed  to,  and  Bishop 
Chrystie  was  pitched  on  for  this,  who  came  upon  their  desire,  and  having 
read  Prayers  for  them,  first  on  a  Litany  day,  and  then  on  the  Lord's-day 
after,  left  them  to  continue  it.  This  Letter  of  the  Bishop  of  Edr  Mr.  Norie 
afterwards  termed  an  Order,  and  used  to  value  himself  that  he  was  the  only 
person  who  had  such  an  Oder  from  his  Bishop  for  that  purpose.  And 
indeed,  if  it  was  a  peremptory  Order,  J.  believe  he  was  so  far  in  the  right; 
for  that  worthy  Prelate,  tho  he  encouraged  the  bringing  in  of  the  Prayers 
all  he  could,  yet  did  not  think  proper  to  impose  them,  especially  in.  our 
present  circumstances.  But  there  was  something  so  very  singular  in  this 
case,  where  Mr.  Norie  had  so  long  and  so  stiffly  opposed  the  general  bent  of 
his  Congregation,  that  it  was  no  wonder  if  he  stepped  a  little  beyond  his 
ordinary  method.  But  tho  Mr.  Norie  was  thus  prevailed  on  to  comply  so 
far  as  to  read  the  ordinary  Prayers  on  Sundays  and  Litany  days,  yet  at 

TOL.  II.  P 


114       PRAYER  BOOKS  SENT  FROM  ENGLAND. 

Easter  following  lie  continued  to  Celebrate  the  Holy  Eucharist  after  his 
former  manner,  such  as  I  have  described  above,  and  designed  to  have  done 
so  next  year  also,  at  the  return  of  that  solemn  Festival ;   but  finding  the 
Gentry,  many  of  whom  were  then  in  Town,  determined  to  leave  it  on  that 
account,  and  to  go  to  such  places  in  the  Country  where  they  might  have  the 
opportunity  of  having  it  Celebrated  in  a  manner  agreeable  to  their  senti 
ments,  he  ever  yielded  to  them  in  this  also,  tho  not  without  shewing  some 
rcluctancy.     The  pretext  he  made  use  of  against  it  was  the  same  he  had  so 
much  insisted  on  against  the   Common  Prayers  in  general,  viz.,  that  he 
would  thereby  lose  many  of  the   Commons  ;    but  how  very  groundless  this 
pretext  was,  soon  appeared,  for  none  of  them  absented  or  took  any  the  least 
objection  at  it ;  nay,  his  Congregation,  wcb  was  indeed  one  of  the  most  con 
siderable  iu  the  Kingdom,  rather  increased  upon  it  than  diminished.    There 
were  some  few  others  of  the  old  Clergie,  one  or  two  at  Fdr  itself,  who  did 
not  use  the  Common  Prayers  during  all  Bishop  Rose's  lifetime.     But  into 
most  of  our  Congregations  throughout  the  whole  Nation  they  were  very 
quickly  introduced,  without  the  least  opposition  that  I  know  of  any  where, 
even  from  the  meanest  of  our  Commons.     The  prudent  and  gentle  methods 
used  by  the   Bishop  of  Edr,   wch  can  never   be   sufficiently  commended, 
contributed  not  a  little  to  the  success  of  this  whole  affair ;  for  he  contented 
himself  w1  doing  what  he  could  to  promote  it  by  his  encouragement,  but 
without  attempting  in  the  least  to  impose  it  by  way  of  authority,  a  method 
Avch  I  am  perswaded  would  be  the  most  effectual  in  many  cases,  where  any 
tiling  might  be  judged  tit  to  be  reformed.     "\Vc  were  also  very  much  assisted 
by  the  charity  of  the  good  people  in  England,  who  sent  down  from  time  to 
time  great  parcels  of  Common  Prayer  Books,  wch  were  distributed  gratis 
among  the  common  people,  to  their  great  encouragement.     This  is  what  we 
ought  ever  to  retain  a  very  grateful  sense   of,  as  well  as  of  their  other 
charities  to  us,  and  to  pray  that  they  may  be  rewarded  by  the  Blessing  of 
God  on  them  and  their  posterity. 

Some  people  among  us  could  have  wished  that  instead  of  the  English 
Prayer  Book,  that  wh  was  formerly  composed  for  the  use  of  our  own  Church 
in  K.  Ch.  Ist's  time,  had  been  now  introduced;  but  that  could  not  have  been 
so  easily  done,  as  for  other  reasons  perhaps,  so  especially  through  want  of 
Books,  whereof  so  great  a  number  as  was  requisite  to  be  distributed  among 
the  Commons  could  not  have  been  so  soon  provided.  Besides,  the  differences 
betwixt  them  are  not  very  material,  save  only  in  the  Communion  Office. 
Here,  indeed,  ours  is  allowed  to  have  the  preference,  even  by  the  judgement 
of  the  learnedest  Writers  of  the  Church  of  England  themselves,  and  accord- 


ENGLISH  NONJUBOKS'  COXTTtOYEP.SY.  115 

ingly  it  was  used  by  scverals  of  our  most  intelligent  Clcrgie,  wl  the  Bishop 
of  Edr'-s  knowledge  and  allowance  ;  and  even  some  who  did  not  use  it,  did 
yet  interject  a  Prayer  of  Invocation  for  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
bless  and  sanctify  the  Elements,  and  to  make  them  the  Sacramental  Body 
and  Blood  of  Christ,  and  read  the  first  Prayer  in  the  Post-Communion 
immediately  after  the  words  of  Institution,  for  a  Prayer  of  Oblation  as  it 
was  originally  designed.  It  may  not  be  improper  also  to  remark,  that  even 
before  we  had  the  Common  Prayers  it  was  the  custom  in  many  places  to 
mix  a  little  pure  and  clean  water  with  the  Sacramental  "Wine,  not  indeed  at 
the  Altar,  but  in  preparing  the  Elements  before.  This  custom  was  almost 
universal  throughout  the  North,  perhaps  from  the  very  time  of  the  Beforma- 
tion ;  and  after  this  time  we  arc  now  speaking  of,  it  came  to  spread  still 
somewhat  more,  several  of  our  younger  Clergie,  especially,  beginning  to 
acquaint  themselves  w1  the  Principles  and  Practices  of  the  Primitive  Church, 
and  to  pay  a  great  regard  to  them. 

In  the  year  1717,  there  arose  a  Controversie  among  the  Xonjurors  in 
England,  concerning  the  restoring  of  some  primitive  usages  that  had  been 
retained  in  the  first  Liturgic  of  Edw'1  Gth,  which,  as  Mr.  AVhcatly  observes 
[Hat.  Illitfitr.,  }>/t:/.  20] ,  had  this  just  encomium  from  King  and  Parliament, 
li  that  it  was  set  forth  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  but  were  dropt  in  the 
second,  not  from  any  worthy  cause,  but  rather  from  curiosity,  as  was 
declared  even  by  the  Parliament  wch  confirmed  that  review  ;  that  is,  indeed, 
to  gratify  such  as  were  tinctured  w*  the  leaven  of  Calvinism,  and  particularly 
these  two  forreign  Divines,  Buccr  and  Martyr,  whom  Cranmer  had  invited 
over,  and  but  too  much  consulted  in  this  affair.  These,  perhaps,  did  not 
obtain  to  have  all  the  alterations  made  in  the  English  Reformation  vvch 
probably  they  might  have  desired,  but  that  they  prevailed  so  far  as  to 
procure  "the  laying  aside  several  very  primitive  and  venerable  usages" 
[Wheathj's  Hat.  Jllitxti:,  p.  IT  ,  is  not  to  be  denied. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  my  present  design  to  give  any  particular  Account 
of  this  Controversie,  Wh  may  be  much  better  understood  by  consulting  the 
learned  Writings  that  were  Published  on  both  sides,  and  are  very  well  worthy 
to  be  carefully  read  and  compared  together  by  all  such  as  would  frame  a 
right  judgement  of  it.  Only  it  may  be  proper  to  be  observed  here,  that  they 
who  were  against  the  proposed  alterations  did  not  pretend  to  condemn  these 
usages  as  any  way  sinful  or  culpable  ;  nor  did  they  deny  that  they  were 
attested  by  the  Fathers  who  wrote  even  before  the  first  Council  of  Nice,  as 
received  and  practised  by  the  Church  in  the  2d  Century  at  least,  that  is,  in 
the  age  \vch  immediately  succeeded  the  Death  of  the  Apostles ;  for  the  testi- 


110  PARTICULARS  OF  DISPUTATION. 

monies  of  Justin  Martyr,  Ircncus,  Clemens  Alexanclvinus,  Tertnllian,  St. 
Cyprian,  and  Arnobius,  do  plainly  evince  this  beyond  all  eontroversie.  Xor 
farther  is  it  disputed,  that  after  that  Council,  from  the  4th  Century  down 
wards  till  the  very  times  of  die  Reformation,  they  were  universally  ased  by 
the  whole  Catholick  Church,  this  being  also  unquestionably  evident  from  the 
Writings  of  the  subsequent  Fathers,  as  well  as  from  the  Councils  and  Publick 
Liturgies  of  all  Churches  ;  nay,  some  of  them  at  least  freely  owned  them  to 
be  desideranda,  and  thai  they  should  be  hcartih  glad  to  have  them  restored 
in  a  regular  way.  All  that  they  pleaded  was — 1st,  that  they  were  not  of 
absolute  necessity,  and  that  because,  as  they  alleged,  they  were  not  contained 
in  the  Scriptures  :  and  21y,  thai  nothing  short  of  their  being  thus  .necessary 
could  make  it  allowable  for  them  to  use  them,  as  being  strictly  bound  to  the 
observance  of  their  present  Liturgy,  til]  it  should  be  altered  by  an  authority 
every  way  equal  to  that  wch  had  established  it.  On  the  contrary,  their 
adversaries  asserted  that  they  wci'c  ncccssarv  parts  of  Christian  Worship, 
that  they  were  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures,  if  explained  according  to  the 
notions  and  phraseology  of  the  age  in  wcli  they  were  wrote,  which  is  neces 
sary  for  understanding  the  sense  of  all  ancient  Writings  :  and  that  thn  it  had 
been  otherwise,  yet  their  necessity  might  have  been  sufficiently  proved  from 
Apostolical  Tradition,  as  St.  Basil  observes  [Ad  Amplrilocliium,  <lc  Xj>.  Smicto 
c.  27.,  Yid<>  el  <ij>ud  Jjcceri;/.  I'and.  C'un.,  Tuiti.  '2,  ]>.  370],  "  tho  the  Apostles 
did  indeed  commit  the  yjr^vy  para ,  or  Doctrines  of  Christianity,  to  writing  in 
the  Scriptures,  yet  not  the  tibypara,  or  Mysteries  of  the  Christian  Worship. 
These,  thu  equally  tiscful  and  necessary  to  Christian  piety,  and  what  cannot 
be  rejected  without  doing  the  greatest  injury  to  the  Gospel,  yet  the  Church 
receives  as  delivered  to  them  only  by  xVpostolical  Tradition,  in  such  a  manner 
as  is  proper  to  the  nature  of  mysteries  :  i.e.,  so  as  not  to  be  distinctly  known, 
and  understood  by  the  uninitiated,  and  wch  consequently  could  not  be  plainly 
delivered  in  Writing.  Obscurity  is  also  a  way  of  keeping  things  secret,  as  he 
farther  observes,  and  this  the  Scripture  uses  in  speaking  of  any  of  these 
doypara.  All  which,  says  he,  is  designed  for  the  benefit  of  the  uninitiated 
reader,  that  the  Publication  of  them  may  not  render  these  venerable 
Mysteries  cheap  and  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  such  as  are  not  duly 
prepared  to  receive  them."  They  urged  also  the  testimony  of  St.  Augustine, 
St.  Jerome,  Tertullian,  &c.,  as  also  several  passages  from  the  Scriptures 
themselves,  to  prove  the  obligation  of  observing  unwritten  Traditions  when 
the  conveyance  is  unexceptionable.  So  that  the  Controversie  turned,  not 
on  their  lawfulness  or  expedience,  or  on  their  being  desiderauda — things 
wanted  to  compleat  the  English  Eeformation,  the  restoration  of  wch  in  a 


THE  BISHOP  OU  EDINBURGH.  117 

regular  way  were  to  bo  wished  for — but  on  their  being  necessary  or  essential, 
as  some  were  pleased  to  express  it.  This  1  remark  not  with  any  design  to 
pass  a  judgment  in  this  matter,  but  only  for  the  sake  of  some  among  us, 
who,  either  through  their  own  ignorance  or  to  serve  their  private  ends,  by 
imposing,  after  a  most  unjustifiable  manner,  on  the  ignorance  of  others, 
endeavour  to  raise  clamours  against  these  usages,  as  unlawful,  Popish,  and 
superstitious  ;  by  wch  they  unawares  do  the  greatest  service  imaginable  to 
Popery,  by  confounding  it  with  pure,  primitive  Christianity  ;  and  are  so 
very  daring  as  to  condemn  the  judgment  and  practice  of  the  Catholick 
Church,  even  in  the  earliest  and  purest  ages,  those  ages  wherein  the  noble 
army  of  Martyrs  sealed  their  testimony  for  the  truth  of  Christianity  with 
their  blood,  and  wherein  Miracles  and  other  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit 
were  still  continued  with  the  Church  in  a  plentiful  manner.  Whereas  the 
Church  of  England  herself  proposed  these  very  ages  as  the  standard  of  hers, 
as  they  ought  unquestionably  to  be  of  all  reformation.  And,  if  this  were  a 
proper  place  for  it,  it  were  easy  to  prove  by  a  large  collection  of  testimonies 
that  the  learnedest  ^^Triters  of  that  Church  have  ever  mentioned  all  these 
Usages  with  approbation,  both  before  and  since  this  Controvcrsie  began  ;  and 
seem  to  rcgrate  that  she  should  have  been  prevailed  on  by  the  forementioned 
influence  so  far  to  depart  from  her  own  rule  as  to  lay  them  aside.  Xay,  it 
is  objected  to  her  by  some  of  the  Dissenters  themselves,  when  they  are  urged 
wl  the  arguments  from  Antiquity.  But  to  go  on  wl  our  Narrative.  No 
sooner  was  this  Coutrovcrsic  started  in  England  but  both  parties  applied  to 
the  Bishop  of  Edr,  each  of  them  endeavouring  to  engage  him  to  their  interest. 
But  this  wise  and  prudent  Prelate  rightly  judged  that  it  was  his  business 
only  to  act  the  part  of  a  mediator  betwixt  them  if  possible,  which  yet  he 
found  himself  very  much  difliculted  how  to  do,  considering  that  as  the  one 
asserted  these  Usages  to  be  so  absolutely  necessary  that  they  could  by  no 
means  Communicate  without  them ;  so  the  other,  who  denied  this,  pleaded 
their  obligation  to  adhere  to  the  established  Liturgy  of  their  Church  ;  but 
he  would  by  no  means  declare  himself  of  either  side.  This  plainly  appears 
by  Letters  still  extant  under  his  hand,  in  one  of  which,  Dated  May  22d, 
1718,  he  says — "  In  my  humble  opinion,  seeing  that  matters  are  come  to  an 
open  rupture,  and  that  coiitroversie,  new  among  Protestants,  stands  not  so 
much  upon  the  foot  of  expediency  or  inexpediency,  lawfulness  or  unlawful 
ness,  primitiveriess  or  not  (for  all  primitive  Usages  are  not  necessary),  but  is 
stated  in  the  terms  of  necessity  or  no  necessity,  we  wave  any  interposing  in 
this  matter,  untill  we  see,  if  not  the  issue  and  end  of  this  debate,  yet  at  least 
something  farther  into  it ;  for  till  one  party  find  itself  at  a  loss  in  point  of 


118  SCOTCH  COMMUNION  OFFICE. 

argument  and  reason,  I  sec  no  hopes  of  succeeding  in  any  enterprise  of  ac 
commodation."  And  a  few  lines  after,  lie  adds — "As  for  my  own  part, 
seeing  so  much  stress  is  laid  upon  them,  I  am  very  desirous  of  farther 
information  ;  heing,  God  willing,  resolved,  if  I  find  these  Usages  strictly 
necessary,  to  embrace  them  together,  wl  all  the  disadvantages  that  may 
attend  them  ;  if  only  lawful,  some  way  useful  or  desireahle,  prudence  in  this 
case,  and  in  such  cases  only,  ought  to  ho  consulted."  And  in  another, 
Dated  September  18th,  in  that  same  year — "Mr.  Peck  continues  still  here, 
notwithstanding  that  8  or  10  days  ago  he  asked  my  commands  for  London. 
I  told  him  that  I  would  write  wl  him,  and  repeated  to  him  what  I  had  told 
him  long  ago,  which  was,  that  I  believed  we  would  not  explain  ourselves  in 
the  matter  of  the  controverted  Prints  until  we  saw  the  issue  of  the  Contro- 
versic."  And  in  another  Letter  of  his,  February  18ih,  1720,  but  a  very 
short  time  before  his  Death,  after  giving  his  approbation  of  some  proposals 
of  Accommodation  that  had  been  drawn  up  by  a  gentleman  at  his  desire,  ho 
adds — "But  as  I  find  himself  something  distrustful  of  the  success  of  his 
proposal  and  expedient,  as  matters  stand  stated  at  present  witli  our  Brethren 
abroad,  so  I  am  afraid  likewise  that  untill  the  present  ferment  that  is  among 
them  be  something  abated,  they  shall  not  be  easily  wrought  upon  to  hearken 
to  terms  of  Unity  or  Concord  ;  thu  I  am  hopeful  that  time  may  bring  them  to 
more  tractablcness  and  temper."  And  that  indeed  this  good  Bishop  was  no 
enemy  to  ancient  Usages,  but  wished  that  they  might  be  established  among 
us,  tht')  lie  was  afraid  to  have  them  urged  and  imposed  in  so  rigid  a  manner 
as  not  at  all  to  admit  of  any  prudential  allowances,  at  least  without  the 
most  indispensible  necessity,  may  be  clearly  seen  from  what  he  writes  on 
occasion  of  some  Administrations  that  he  judged  to  be  defective,  in  a  Letter 
of  his,  Dated  the  30th  of  July,  1713,  long  before  this  Controvcrsie  began, 
wherein  he  says  "  that  he  hopes,  through  the  Divine  indulgence,  from  the 
Churches  in  wch  they  live,  their  acceptation  of  them,  and  the  insuperable 
difficulties  the  far  greater  part  of  people  arc  under  to  know  otherwise,  they 
shall  sustain  no  prejudice  in  that  case  ;  but  that  for  such,  who  upon 
maturity  of  judgement,  after  diligent  enquiry,  scruple  them,  he  thinks  it 
hard  to  reject  them  when  they  conic  to  have  these  defects  supplied."  Only 
as  to  the  manner  of  doing  it,  he  advises  that  great  caution  be  used,  and 
then  concludes  with  this  excellent  Prayer — "  God  Almighty,  give  us  all 
fuller  and  clearer  light,  and  establish  all  things  among  us  upon  the  true 
ancient  foundations."  Besides,  I  have  already  observed  that  he  allowed  the 
use  of  the  Scotish  Liturgie  or  Communion  Office  ;  no  doubt  as  reckoning  it 
on  this  account  preferable  to  the  English  ;  and  was  very  well  aware  that  the 


EXCELLENT  EEGIMEN  OF  BISHOP  EOSE.  119 

mixture  was  also  used  by  many,  and  particularly  by  Bishop  Falconar  (for 
whom  ho  always  expressed  the  greatest  friendship  and  regard),  several  years 
before  the  English  Controversic  began,  as  well  as  afterwards.  Nay,  farther, 
he  allowed  that  gentleman,  from  whom  he  had  the  proposals  of  Accommo 
dation  mentioned  above,  the  use  even  of  the  Communion  Office,  then  lately 
composed  in  England,  in  his  own  private  family,  being  sufficiently  convinced 
of  his  due  regard  to  the  Peace  and  Unity  of  the  Church,  and  deference  to 
the  authority  of  his  Superiours. 

On  the  20th  day  of  March,  1720,  it  pleased  God  to  remove  this  excellent 
person  from  us,  after  he  had  sate  so  long  at  the  helm  in  very  cloudy  and 
stormy  weather,  and  governed  this  Church  (the  whole  burthen  of  wch  lay  on 
his  shoulders)  w*  the  greatest  prudence  and  caution,  and  Av1  a  very  even  and 
steady  hand.  His  death  was  somewhat  sudden,  so  that  he  left  no  directions 
how  matters  were  to  be  managed  after  him  ;  but  his  own  example,  had  it 
been  followed  by  his  Successors,  might  have  served  instead  of  all  directions 
he  could  have  possibly  given. 

Upon  his  demise  (says  the  Author  of  the  "  Review  of  the  Elections  of 
Bishops  in  the  Primitive  Church,"  whose  words  I  shall  here  set  down, 
because  he  not  only  knew  the  fact  perfectly  well  himself,  but  hath  also,  as 
he  tells  us,  extracted  his  Account  from  the  Minutes  thereof),  all  the  Clergic 
in  and  about  Edinburgh,  "  whether  properly  belonging  to  that  Diocese  or 
not,  did,  by  common  consent,"  &c. — (the  words  of  the  Book,  which  sec,  are 
quoted  at  length  from  p.  230  to  these  words,  p.  210,  "this  is  clear  from  the 
preceding  remarks.")  Thus  far  this  learned  gentleman,  to  whose  remarks  I 
shall  add  other  three,  no  less  obvious — 1st,  It  is,  I  think,  from  hence  mani 
fest  beyond  dispute,  that,  as  I  said  above,  after  the  Death  of  the  other  Ante- 
Eevolution  Bishops,  Bishop  Eosc,  during  all  his  lifetime,  had  kept  the 
Government  of  this  whole  National  Church  in  his  own  hand,  and  never 
admitted  those  new  Consecrated  Bishops  at  large  to  a  partnership  with  him 
in  the  Jurisdiction  thereof,  as  a  College  Avherein  things  were  to  be  carried 
by  a  majority  of  votes  ;  otherwise  how  could  their  characters  have  been  so 
little  known  to  all  these  Presbyters  as  that  they  could  say,  "  They  had  only 
heard  it  whispered  about  that  they  had  been  received  into  the  Order  of 
Bishops,  but  that  it  was  still  but  hearsay"?  21y,  That  Avhat  Bishop  Fal 
conar  here  declared,  in  the  name  and  presence  of  the  rest  of  his  Brethren, 
did  not  drop  from  him  rashly  and  unadvisedly,  but  was  agreeable  to  his 
settled  judgment,  this  appears  from  a  Letter  of  his  to  that  gentleman  who 
drew  up  the  above-mentioned  Proposals,  and  sent  them  together  with  the 
Letter  wch  he  wrote  along  with  them  to  Bishop  Eose,  to  be  revised  by  him, 


120  LETTEES  OF  BISHOP  FALCONAE. 

and  either  forwarded  or  not,  as  lie  should  approve  of  them.  This  gentleman, 
writing  to  this  Bishop,  had  said,  that  "  That  Government  was  new  and 
unprecedented,  if  it  could  properly  Le  called  a  Government  at  all,  where 
there  were  only  Bishops  at  large  who,  tho  they  may  perform  Episcopal  acts 
in  a  vacant  Diocese,  yet  cannot  claim  any  Title  to  a  particular  Jurisdiction, 
or  challenge  the  obedience  of  the  subjects  of  any  particular  Diocese,  ante 
cedently  to  a  Canonical  Election;"  adding  these  words,  "This  is  a  very 
great  inconveniency,  which  f.  could  heartily  wish  were  timeously  thought  of 
wl  respect  to  ourselves  ;  where,  if  it  be  not  prevented,  there  are  some  events, 
not  very  unlikely  to  happen,  wch  may  make  it  of  very  bad  consequence." 
This  Bishop  Falconar,  in  his  forcsaid  Letter  to  him,  Dated  December  14th, 
1719,  takes  particular  notice  of.  •''  What  you  suspect,"  says  he,  "  concerning 
Bishops  at  large,  is  as  seasonable  so  1  chink  most  providential."  This  he 
said,  because  he  hoped  it  would  have  put  the  Bishop  in  mind  to  take  proper 
measures  in  time  with  respect  to  the  Government  of  this  Church,  so  as  that 
it  might  be  settled  on  a  regular  footing,  as  far  as  circumstances  would 
permit,  in  case  of  the  event  of  his  own  Death.  But  ;das  '  the  many  and 
uneasy  avocations  he  every  day  met  with,  and  the  bad  state  of  his  health, 
both  which  he  complains  of  in  his  Letter  of  February  18th,  1720,  which  I 
have  mentioned  above,  and  his  being  so  soon  after  snatched  away  from  us, 
disappointed  these  hopes.  But  there  is  another  Letter  of  Bishop  Falconar's 
still  extant  likewise,  which  was  wrote  immediately  after  Bishop  Eosc's 
Death,  and  before  Bishop  Fullarton's  coming  to  Town,  which  shews  that 
not  only  he,  but  the  Presbyters  also  themselves,  were  aware  of  this.  "  Our 
Presbyters  here  are  divided,''  says  bo,  "  and  some  of  them  moved  the  sight 
of  our  Syngrapha,  pleading  that  they  were  not,  in  matters  of  that  conse 
quence,  to  go  on  presumption,  but  on  evidence.  To  this  we  frankly  went 
in  ;  but  then  the  same  persons,  though  they  own  all  honour  to  be  due  to  our 
character,  and  that  we  are  vested  with  full  Faculty  to  Ordain  and  Confirm, 
now  that  all  the  Sees  of  the  Nation  were  vacant,  yet  deny  us  any  power  or 
jurisdiction,  through  defect  of  Election.  You  know  that  I  was  apprized  of 
this,  insomuch  that  I  never  exerted  any  act  of  authority,  and  had  nothing 
more  at  heart  than  to  have  some  reasonable  expedient  condescended  on 
how  valid  Titles  to  appropriated  Districts  should  be  constituted."  And  31y, 
It  is  also  plain  from  the  above  Account  that  it  was  the  design  of  the  Electors 
that  the  person  to  be  chosen  by  them  should  be,  in  the  proper  sense,  Bishop 
of  Edinburgh,  wl  the  same  Ecclesiastical  Privileges  that  his  Predecessors  in 
that  See  had  enjoyed.  For  this  was  the  very  reason,  and  indeed  they  could 
not  possibly  have  any  other,  why  they  admitted  all  the  Presbyters,  even  of 


THE  COLLEGE  SYSTEM.  121 

other  Dioceses  or  Districts,  who  happened  to  be  then  in  Town,  to  join  with 
them  in  the  Election,  on  account  of  the  extcnsiveness  of  his  influence  as 
Vicar  of  St.  Andrews,  and  the  concern  they  might  have  therein,  during  the 
Vacancy  of  that  Metropolitical  See.  Not  that  this  gave  these  other  Presby 
ters  a  proper  Title  to  claim  any  votes  in  this  matter,  but  that  the  Presbyters 
of  that  Diocese  to  whom  it  properly  belonged  thought  it  reasonable  to  allow 
them  a  share  in  it,  especially  in  the  then  present  circumstances,  when,  all 
the  other  Dioceses  being  vacant,  they  also  must  be  under  his  immediate 
inspection,  so  long  as  their  Vacancy  continued,  which,  with  respect  to 
severals  of  them  at  least,  might  probably  be  for  some  considerable  time. 
But  no  sooner  was  Bishop  Fullarton  Elected,  than  some  of  the  other  Bishops 
framed  to  themselves  the  scheme  of  governing  this  whole  National  Church 
in  common,  under  the  name  of  the  "  College  of  Bishops,"  a  name  indeed 
very  well  known,  as  used  by  the  Ancients  to  signify  all  the  Bishops  of  the 
Catholick  Church,  as  being  all  of  one  and  the  same  Order,  distinct  from  and 
superiour  to  Presbyters,  and  each  of  them  the  single  principle  of  unity  to 
his  particular  Church;  but  perfectly  new  and  unheard  of  as  applied  by  them 
to  a  sett  of  Bishops  at  large  acting  in  common,  which  made  this  Church  no 
better  than  a  monster  with  a  multitude  of  heads.  And  in  order  to  effectuate 
this  their  newly  projected  scheme,  they  insisted  that  he  should  not  be  Bishop 
of  the  Diocese  of  Edr  according  to  the  intention  of  his  electors,  but  only  "  of 
the  District  in  and  about  Edinburgh,"  as  they  were  pleased  to  name  it,  and 
that  he  should  be  only  their  Primus,  with  a  power  of  convocating  them,  and 
presiding  in  their  Meetings  ;  which,  he  being  a  good-natured  man,  through 
the  over-easiness  of  his  temper,  did  then  comply  with.  It  may  be  thought 
strange  that  Bishop  Falconar,  who,  from  what  has  been  above  related, 
appears  to  have  been  very  well  aware  of  the  no-authority  of  Bishops  at  large, 
should  yet  have  yielded  to  this  project  of  a  College,  which  he  not  only  knew 
to  be  without  precedent,  but  to  be  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  primitive 
plan  of  Ecclesiastical  Government,  and  that  fundamental  principle  of  Units 
Dens,  units  CIiriNtus,  tnnts  Kjiixcnjms,  In  uiui  Kfdcxia — One  God,  one  Christ,  one 
Bishop,  in  one  Church,  upon  which  the  Unity  of  the  Church  was  established. 
But  as  he  knew  the  stiffness  of  those  he  had  to  deal  with,  he  judged  it  might 
be  of  dangerous  consequence  if  they  should,  upon  any  account,  split  among 
themselves  at  so  critical  a  juncture.  Besides,  it  had  been  suggested  to  him 
that  the  Clergie  in  Angus  and  Mearns,  who  had  a  great  esteem  of  him,  would, 
if  it  were  thought  proper,  cheerfully  concur  in  Electing  him  for  their  Bishop, 
and  that  others  probably  would  follow  their  example,  so  that  by  this  method 
the  Nation  might  by  common  consent  be  divided  into  large  contiguous 

Q 


122  BISHOP  FALCONAR'S  JURISDICTION. 

Districts,  instead  of  the  ancient  Dioceses,  and  the  whole  be  very  well 
governed  by  five,  or  at  most  six  Bishops,  so  long  as  the  Church  continued 
in  her  present  situation.  This  project  he  thought  to  be  so  very  plausible  as 
that  it  could  hardly  fail  to  take  effect,  and  that  the  College  Scheme  would 
be  thereby  extinguished  of  itself,  without  any  noise  or  opposition.  lie 
therefore  acquainted  his  Brethren  with  the  design  these  Presbyters  had  of 
Electing  him,  and  that  he  thought  it  would  be  a  good  precedent  for  the 
Presbyters  in  other  places  to  chusc  the  rest  of  them  for  their  respective 
Bishops  after  the  same  manner,  and  this  they  seemed  at  that  time  to  be 
very  well  pleased  with. 

Upon  Bishop  Falconar's  return  from  Edr,  the  forcsaid  Presbyters  in 
Angus,  Mearns,  and  part  of  Perthshire,  did  accordingly  set  about  this  their 
designed  Election,  and  by  a  Deed,  Subscribed  by  almost  all  of  them,  did 
address  him  "  to  take  upon  him  the  Spiritual  Government  and  Inspection 
of  them,  and  the  people  committed  to  their  charge;"  adding,  "and  we  do 
hereby  promise  to  acknowledge  you  as  our  proper  Bishop,  and  to  pay  all  due 
and  Canonical  obedience  to  you  as  such."  The  supposed  Author  of  the  late 
"  View  of  the  Elections  of  Bishops,"  &c.,  is  one  of  the  Subscribers  to  this 
Deed. 

About  the  same  time,  the  Presbyters  within  the  Presbytery  of  St. 
Andrews,  considering  that  he  had  his  residence  among  them,  and  that  they 
were  too  few  to  have  a  distinct  Bishop  of  their  own  (being  but  three  in 
number),  did,  by  a  Deed  of  the  same  nature,  put  themselves  likewise  under 
his  Inspection  as  their  proper  Bishop.  And  he  ever  after  continued  to  act 
as  the  proper  Bishop  of  both  these  Districts,  and  was  owned  and  acknow 
ledged  as  such  by  all  ranks  both  of  Clergy  and  People,  his  Title  thereto  not 
being  opposed,  or  so  much  as  called  in  question,  by  any  person  whatsoever. 

But  to  return  to  Bishop  Fullarton.  It  was  thought  proper  to  lay  before 
some  persons  of  distinction  the  Account  of  his  Election,  and  of  the  present 
posture  of  the  Churche's  affairs,  that  they  might  have  their  judgment  con 
cerning  them,  to  wch  they  all  professed  to  pay  the  greatest  deference.  And 
they,  upon  this  application  made  to  them,  gave  it  for  Bishop  Fullarton,  that 
he  should  be  proper  Bishop  of  the  Diocese  of  Edr,  according  to  the  intention 
of  his  Electors,  and  should  enjoy  the  same  Ecclesiastical  Privileges  Avhich 
his  Predecessors  in  that  See  had  done.  This  being  notified  to  his  Brethren, 
none  of  them  made  the  least  objection  against  it,  but  on  the  contrary  seemed 
readily  to  acquiesce  in  it,  insomuch  that  w1  their  consent  and  allowance  he 
immediately  thereupon  altered  his  Subscription. 


DISTRICT  OF  FIFE— JOHN  FALCON  All.  123 


LIV.  JOHN  FALCONAR.    A.D.  1720-23.    (Consecrated  1709.) 

John  Falconar  was  well  born,  being  a  descendant  of  the  Lord 
Halkerton's  Family.  In  1088  he  was  ejected  from  being  Rector 
of  Carnbee,  a  rural  Parish  Church  (Stipend  .£'238  17-s  8<l,  Glebe 
£30),  near  the  foot  of  Kellie  Law  (810  feet  above  sea-level)  and 
Castle,  three  miles  north  from  Pittcnweem,  in  Fife.  Kellie 
Castle  was  formerly  the  seat  of  the  Earl  of  Kellie,  where  the 
Bishop  was  often  a  visitor.  It  is  now  a  ruin,  with  fine  trees 
about  it,  looking  down  upon  Balcaskie  and  the  Firth  of  Forth. 
Yet  there  are  good  Paintings  on  some  of  the  Panellings.  While 
Minister  of  this  Parish,  our  Bishop  Married  a  daughter  of  the 
Lord  Dunkeld,  by  whom  he  had  two  sons. 

Xtuubcr  18  in  JJix/iop  Forbes'  Catalogue. — Letters  of  Orders,  (C'c.,  in  the  Episcopal 

( '(tl/inet,  Glenalmond. 

7.  (Copy)  Letters  of  Orders  of  Mr.  John  Falconar  into  the  Presbyterate, 
by  the  Bishop  (Paterson)  of  Edr  (in  S.  Giles'),  May  19,  1G83,  wherein  these 
words — Ju.vtn  mores  et  ritits  I'lcclexitf  Scot  tea  na',  "  according  to  the  Eites  and 
Ceremonies  of  the  Scottish  Church." 

10.  (Original)  Act  of  Ordination  into  the  Episcopate,  Mr.  John  Fal 
conar,  by  Bishops  of  Edr  (Rose),  and  Dunblane  (Douglas),  and  Bishop  Sage; 
Dundee,  Aprile  28,  1701). 

The  Piev.  Win.  Bright,  who  has  done  so  well  to  the  memory 
of  this  good  Bishop,  has  these  observations  in  TJie  Scottish 
Ecclesiastical  Journal,  vol.  //.,  p.  244 -(Nov.,  1852)  :— 

We  may  easily  realise  the  scene  at  Dundee  :  The  aged  Bishop  of  Dun 
blane  receiving  Falconar  and  Christie,  and  waiting  a  day,  as  it  seems,  for 
Rose  and  Sage  ;  for  it  was  on  the  28th  of  April  that  they  proceeded  to 
Celebrate,  with  a  mournful  privacy,  the  most  august  solemnity  of  the 
Catholic  Church.  Their  Rites  were  shorn  of  the  old  Cathedral  splendour; 
their  Veni  Creator  nrust  be  murmured  like  a  voice  out  of  the  dust.  But  they 
had  with  them  the  Eternal  Pontiff,  and  the  unfailing  powers  of  His  King 
dom.  They  were  speaking  His  words  and  doing  His  work ;  rather,  He  was 
working  by  them.  And  it  was,  doubtless,  in  full  assurance  of  having  Him 
for  their  Unseen  Comforter,  that  Falconar  and  Christie  knelt  before  those 
worn  old  men,  to  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  office  and  work  of  Bishops 
in  the  Church  of  God. 


121  D1SI1UCT   OF  FIFE. 

The  Consecrating  Prelates,  in  the  following  Document,  quoted 
by  several  Historians  from  MS.  Memoir*  o/'  (lie  Episcopal  Church 
of  Scotland,  evidence  how  straitened  the  Church  then  was  to 
preserve  the  Apostolic  Succession,  and  also,  that  no  Diocesan 
Titles  were  assumed.  Cited  in  Stephen'.^  Hixtonj,  vol.  ic.,p.  39. j 

To  promote  the  harmony,  peace,  unity,  and  order  of  this  most  afflicted 
Church  of  Scotland,  which  (iod  hath  committed  to  our  care,  whenever,  and 
as  far  as  lies  in  our  power,  in  its  so  great  affliction, — "We,  &c.,  .... 
Commend  to  our  beloved  Brethren  in  Christ,  Mr.  John  Falconar,  Priest  and 
Pastor  of  Carnhee,  in  Fife,  and  Mr.  Henry  Christie,  Priest  and  Pastor  of 
Kinross,  whom  we  have  this  day  admitted  as  Associates  in  our  Episcopal 
College,  by  the  Divine  liite  of  Consecration,  to  that  portion  of  the  before- 
mentioned  Scottish  Church,  which  has  its  warfare  in  God,  with  the  Province 
or  Jurisdiction  of  ;  and  we  entrust  it  to  their  Episcopal  care, 

until  Clod,  in  His  great  mercy,  see  iit  to  deal  with  His,  alas!  now  afflicted 
Church,  the  Bride  of  His  dear  Son,  in  this  corner  of  the  earth.  Adding  this, 
also,  our  most  ardent  wish,  that,  relying  upon  the  Lord;  and  undeterred  by 
the  storm  of  persecution,  our  before-mentioned  Brethren  will  watch  with 
anxious  solicitude  that  the  high  and  most  Sacred  Order  of  Bishops,  con 
tinued  by  the  Succession  of  lawful  Ordination,  may  never  fail  nor  cease. 

Bishop  Falconar  continued  after  the  Revolution  to  reside  at 
Carnhee,  and  undertook  the  oversight  of  the  Clergy  and  Con 
gregations  in  the  Counties  of  Angus,  Mearns,  and  Fife ;  and  so 
virtually,  if  not  nominally,  he  was  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews  and 
Brechin.  He  was  at  London  on  the  24th  February  (S.  Matthias' 
Day),  1712,  as  one  of  the  Consecrators  of  Bishop  Cradderar;  and 
again,  the  year  after,  at  the  Hon.  Bishop  Archibald  Campbell's 
Marriage. 

LETTERS  COPIED  BY  BISHOP  JOLLY  I-HOM  THE  ORIGINALS. 

1- — -f  Letter  from  the  JJisIi(>i>  of  Edinburgh  (  Hose  >  to  J/V.  Falconar,  relating  to 
the  great  necessity  for  his  Consecration,  J-Jdinburi/li,  December  2d,  1708. 

lleverend  Brother, — I  doubt  not  but  y1  you,  wl  many  others,  have  been 
laying  the  afflicted  state  of  our  desolate  Church  to  heart,  and  yet  like  to  fall 
under  a  further  desolation  by  the  failure  of  our  Order,  if  some  speedy  course 
be  not  taken  to  prevent  the  same  ;  wherefore,  as  it  is  incumbent  upon  us  all 
to  see  to  some  remedy  to  this  threatening  evil,  so  my  L.  Glasgow  and  I, 
wl  the  consent  and  approbation  of  others,  has  cast  our  eyes  upon  you  to  take 
a  part  w1  us  in  our  Ministry,  and  to  be  associated  w*  us  in  the  Sacred 


JOHN  FALCONAR.  125 

Colledge  ;  and  I  do  not  only  intreat  but  obtest  you,  that  you  would  put 
yourself  in  readiness,  upon  the  first  Advertisement  from  me,  to  come  over 
hither  in  order  to  receive  Imposition  of  Hands  for  y*  effect,  and  so  soon  as  I 
am  informed  when  a  third  of  our  number  can  be  brought  hither,  I  will  not 
fail  to  advertise  you.  I  pray  you  to  keep  this  affair  entirely  to  yourself,  and 
let  nobody  know  of  it.  I  know  what  excuses  from  modesty  and  other  AY  ays 
you  may  be  ready  to  make  ;  but  as  our  present  circumstances,  Avliich  you 
shall  know  at  meeting,  can  permit  no  such  to  be  taken  off  your  hands,  so  I 
beseech  you  not  to  interpose  delays,  Avhich  are  not  sufferable  in  our  present 
case,  but  y1  you  yield  a  ready  compliance  in  Avhat  is  both  necessary  and 
indispensible.  I  expect  a  satisfactory  answer  by  the  ATery  first  occasion ; 
for,  till  I  receive  yours,  I  cannot  send  for  a  third  to  be  present  AYI  us,  and  I 
am  much  afraid  that  my  L.  GlasgOAV  shall  not  last  till  yl  affair  be  over. 
Wherefore,  I  shall  labour  under  great  pain  untill  I  shall  receive  a  satisfac 
tory  return  of  this,  which  is  in  haste  from,  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Bro>"r  and  Servant, 

(Signed)  ALEX.  EDINBUKGEN. 

Sir, — Send  your  ansAver  to  me  under  under  your  son's  cover,  that  it 
may  come  the  more  safely  to  my  hands. — To  Mr.  John  Falconar,  at  Carnbee. 

II. — Another  itjion  tlte  same  subject. 

Reverend  Brother, — You,  I  doubt  not,  Avill  be  surprised  that  you  haA*e 
not  heard  from  me  this  long  time,  and  especially  in  a  certain  matter  of 
importance  as  to  us  both,  Avhereof  I  AATote  formerly  to  you  ;  but  the  matter 
is,  that  our  friend  at  Dundee  has  been  very  ill,  and  not  fit  for  business  this 
while  bygone.  I  myself  likeAvise  have  been  these  G  or  7  Aveeks  bygone  much 
disordered  by  a  violent  sickness  in  my  stomach,  but  I  hope  to  be  in  condition 
to  wait  upon  you  at  Dundee  ag*  the  20  or  27  of  this  month,  and  I  hope  you 
shall  be  there  ag1  y*  time,  in  order  to  Avhat  you  knoAV  of.  If  my  health  serve 
me  not,  I'll  signify  as  much  to  you  next  Avcek  ;  but  if  you  hear  nothing  from 
me,  be  sure  to  keep  tryst  on  the  20,  Avhen  I  hope  to  be  at  Dundee.  I  have 
wrote  this  AY*  no  small  uneasiness,  by  reason  of  a  pain  in  my  right  arm, 
which  obleidges  me  to  say  no  more,  save  y1 1  am,  Reverend  Brother, 
Your  most  affectionate  and  humble  Servant, 

ALEXR.  EDINBUBGEN. 

Edr,  Aprile  15,  1701). — Pray  let  me  hear  Avhe>'r  you  have  got  this,  and 
Avheyr  you  may  be  at  Dundee. — To  the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Falconar,  at 
Carnbee. 

III. — Another  on  the  name  subject. 

Reverend  Brother, — Th6  scarce  anything  else  could  have  prevailed 
Avt  me  to  travel  in  my  present  condition  than  what  I  am  so  anxious  to  have 
finished,  so  I  hope  God  shall  afford  me  strength  to  make  y*  journey,  and  am 
fully  purposed,  God  willing,  to  be  at  Dundee  ag*  the  26  instant.  If  bad 


12(5  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

weather  or  violent  storms  keep  mo  one  day  longer,  I  know  you  will  excuse 
it  ;  but  I  hope  you  shall  be  there  agt  the  day  appointed.  I  could  wish 
yt  our  business  were  done  w*out  ye  knowledge  or  suspicion  of  any  whi>"r  we 
go  to  ;  and  as  you  can  easily  have  a  pretence  to  colour  your  being  there  at 
that  time,  so,  if  you  can  so  contrive  it,  I  wish  it  may  be  pretty  late  before 
you  come  to  Town,  that  our  work  may  be  done  next  morning  before  any 
of  our  Brn  there  know  yl  you  are  in  Town.  I  shall  say  no  more  till  meeting, 
save  y4  I  am,  &c.,  nt  x>i]ir«. 
Edr,  Aprilc  21,  170U. 

X.B.— It  was  not  till  Aprilc  28  y*  he,  toge>r  w*  Mr.  Chrystie  at  Kinross, 
were  Consecrated  Bishops  at  Dundee  by  Bishops  Hose  of  Edr,  Douglas  of 
Dunblane,  and  John  Sage. 

IV. A  Letter  fmiii   the  ]>i*}it>p  »j   Ldinlunjh   In  ]}ixliop  FtiJronar,  Dated  from 

Edinbiiryh,  ./»///  2,  1711. 

Reverend  Brother, — I  had  a  Letter  from  London  last  Post,  acquainting 
me  y*  about  20  days  hence  I  might  expect  here  yl  gentleman.  I  spoke  of  to 
you  at  our  last  meeting.  lie  purposes  to  be  here  altoge^'r  incogito,  and  not 
to  sec  or  be  seen  by  his  friends,  or  any  else,  save  those  w1  whom  he  has 
business  ;  for  his  time  straitens  him,  and  is  resolved  after  the  dispatch  of 
that  immediately  to  return.  "Wherefore,  I  give  you  this  Advertisement,  that 
you  may  so  dispose  of  yourself  as  not  to  be  out  of  the  way  about  y*  time,  in 
case  he  desire  to  see  you,  or  that  you  may  be  useful  for  the  dispatch  of  his 
affair.  This  is  all,  Sir,  at  the  time  from 

Your  very  affectionate  and  humble  Servant, 

(Signed)  A.  E. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  J.  F.,  at  Carnbce,  to  the  care  of  the  Post  of  Creile. 

X.B. — The  gentleman  referred  to  in  ye  above  Letter  was  the  Honour 
able  Mr.  Archibald  Campbell,  who  was  Consecrated  a  Bishop  at  Dundee, 
August  25th,  thereafter,  by  Bishop  Eose  of  Edr,  Bishop  Douglas  of  Dun 
blane,  and  Bishop  Falconar. 

In  17 1G,  the  Usage  Controversy  broke  out  in  England 
between  two  parties  of  the  Nonjurors,  headed  respectively  by 
Collier  and  Spinckes.  Meetings  were  held  with  no  satisfactory 
result.  Collier  and  his  supporters  looked  to  Falconar  for  sym 
pathy.  In  the  autumn  of  1717,  Falconar  wrote  from  Craighall, 
in  Perthshire  (Bishop  Eattray's  house  and  estate),  to  Bishop 
Campbell,  advising  the  Usagers  to  drop  their  Kitual  restorations 
if  they  were  likely  to  drive  away  adherents,  or  to  cause  division 
in  the  body.  In  his  Reply,  Dated  October  31,  1717,  Campbell 


JOHN  FALCONAE.  127 

insists  that  his  friends  considered  it  essential  to  Celebrate  the 
Eucharist  according  to  the  Four  Usages,  and  could  not,  for 
instance,  conscientiously  receive  the  Unmixed  Cup. 

Early  in  1718  (the  year  of  the  New  Communion  Office),  a 
Mr.  Peck  was  sent  by  the  English  Usagers  to  Edinburgh,  to 
procure  some  Synodical  Resolution  from  the  Scottish  Prelates. 
He  did  not,  however,  so  far  as  Bishop  Hose  could  learn,  attend 
even  the  ordinary  Church  Service,  wherein  "there  is  nothing  to 
scrouple  him,"  says  the  Prelate,  "  save  bidding  to  pray  for 
Christ's  Church  Militant.  Neither  did  he  scrouple  to  own  to  me 
that  the  Church  of  England,  as  formerly  constituted,  was  no 
Church,  as  wanting  these  things  insisted  on  to  be  restored." 

V. — A  Letter  from  Mr.  I'cdc  to  ]>isliop  l'"ttlcon<tr,  Ihtted  J^iUnlioyh,  Ait/juxt 

13,  1718. 

P.1  Fui  Sir, — I  have  here  sent  yon  four  Books,  which,  with  those  yon 
received  before,  are  all  y1  have  yet  appeared  on  either  side  of  the  Contro- 
versie.  And  notwithstanding  the  promise  we  have  of  a  2d  Part  of  the  Xo 
Snjiicicnt  HcaxoiiH  for  Ui'xtorimj,  &c.,  we  may  conclude  from  what  we  have 
already  that  the  Common  Place  Books  of  both  partys  are  pretty  well  ex 
hausted,  so  that  we  may  begin  to  judge  which  scale  preponderates.  I 
therefore  beg  the  favour  of  you,  Sir,  so  soon  as  you  have  perused  these 
Papers,  to  send  me  your  thoughts  of  them,  and  whether  the  Book  just  men 
tioned  has  more  depretiated,  or  the  Answer  raised  the  credit  of  Tradition 
higher  than  the  just  regard  we  ought  to  have  for  it.  And  likewise,  whether 
the  Author  who  pleads  Xo  Xccrsxiti/,  &c.,  or  his  antagonist  pleading  a 
Xeci'sxiti/for  an  'Altcrrttinn,  has  best  supported  his  opinion  wl  testimonys  and 
arguments.  If  the  odds  be  considerable  on  either  side,  it  will  be  no  longer 
difficult  to  determine  on  which  side  they  are.  But  the  favour  you  did  me  of 
communicating  your  thoughts  to  me  concerning  the  matters  in  dispute, 
when  I  did  myself  the  honour  to  wait  on  you  in  Angus,  convinces  me  that  I 
need  not  trouble  myself  or  you  wt  entering  into  the  merits  of  the  cause  ;  for 
you  was  then  of  opinion  (and  I  think  you  will  find  nothing  in  these  Papers 
to  make  you  alter  that  opinion),  that  the  things  contended  for  ought  to  be 
restored  ;  and  you  likewise  gave  me  assurances  of  your  readiness  to  use  your 
best  endeavours  for  their  restoration,  but  yt  you  was  for  bringing  it  about  by 
the  gentlest  and  most  inoffensive  methods.  Give  me  leave,  Sir,  to  join 
wt  you  in  those  pious  endeavours,  and  to  propose  a  method  to  your  con 
sideration. 

The  Liturgy  of  the  Cli.  of  Engl(1,  which  at  present  obtains  amongst 
you,  lias  not  an  Ecclesiastical,  or  so  much  as  a  Civil,  sanction  to  recommend 


128  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

the  use  of  it  in  this  Kingdom ;  whereas  your  own,  compiled  in  the  Reign  of 
K.  Charles,  has  both,  as  appears  by  his  Proclamation  prefixed  to  it,  when  it 
is  said — «  \Ve  have  divers  times  recommended  to  ye  Archbishops  and 
Bishops  here,  the  Publishing  of  a  Puhlick  Form  of  Service  in  the  Worship 
ping  of  God,  which  we  would  have  uniformly  observed  therein.  And  the 
same  being  now  condescended  upon,"  fee.  And  then  he  goes  on  and  enjoins 
the  use  of  it.  Here  we  find  it  condescended  upon,  and  Published  by  the 
Prelates,  and  then  Confirmed  by  the  Regal  Authority  ;  and  I  believe  you 
will  not  deny  but  y1  the  Publication  of  it  by  the  Bishops,  to  be  uniformly 
observed,  is  as  much  a  command  on  their  part,  for  an  uniform  observation 
of  it,  as  the  Proclamation  is  on  the  part  of  the  King.  So  then  this  is 
properly  the  Liturgy  of  ye  Ch.  of  Scotl'1,  and  the  other  prevails  only  by  the 
connivance  of  the  present  Governours.  And  the  only  reason  y1 1  ever  heard 
why  the  English  Service  Book  was  received  here,  was  because  the  Copies  of 
your  own  were  scarce,  and  not  sufiieient  for  the  number  of  Communicants, 
a  great  many  of  whose  circumstances  were  such  as  would  not  allow  them  to 
purchase  Books,  and  consequently  a  new  impression  could  not  be  had.  In  this 
your  distress,  some  Prelates  in  England  (with  whom,  by-thc-by,  you  would 
not  have  join'd  in  ye  use  of  them)  sent  you  a  considerable  number  of  English 
Books,  to  be  distributed  among  your  people  gratis,  and  from  yt  time  the  use 
of  them  has  been  continued  here.  But,  if  I  am  not  misinformed,  they  never 
so  obtained  but  yl  most  of,  if  not  all  the  Bishops,  and  a  great  number  of  the 
inferiour  Clergy,  used  them  partially  and  wl  reserve,  supplying  some  defects 
in  the  Consecration  of  ye  Eucharist,  viz.,  the  Invocation  of  the  II.  Sp1  upon 
the  Sacrifice,  and  the  Oblation  of  it  to  God  ye  Fa>'r,  from  their  own  Form, 
which  is  a  certain  argum1  that  in  the  judgem1  of  these  persons  their  own 
Communion  Office  is  more  perfect,  and  consequently  preferable  ;  so  that  the 
only  reason  why  ye  other  is  made  use  of,  is  because,  as  I  observed  before, 
they  have  the  Books  for  nothing.  Now,  the  only  things  to  be  considered 
are,  how  they,  and  their  poor  hearers,  shall  come  at  the  Scots  Service  as 
cheap  ;  and  21y,  how  some  few  alterations  (to  render  it  still  more  perfect 
and  primitive)  may  be  made.  As  for  the  first,  I  propose  this  method, 
viz.,  that  the  Communion  Office  (entitled  the  Com.  Office  according  to  the 
Liturgy  of  ye  Ch.  of  Scotl'1),  should  be  Printed  by  itself,  and  the  whole,  not 
consisting  of  above  a  sheet  and  half  of  paper,  might  be  done  for  a  very  small 
charge,  and  10.000  Copys  cost  but  a  trifling  sum  of  money,  which  sum  might 
easily  be  collected  from  gentlemen,  who  would  not  refuse  to  contribute  to  so 
pious  a  design.  And  21y,  for  the  alterations,  I  shall  mention  only  two. 
The  first  is  in  the  Rubrick,  where  the  Presbyter  is  ordered  "to  offer  up  and 
place  the  Bread  and  Wine  prepared  for  ye  Sacramt  upon  ye  Lord's  Table." 
After  ye  word  Wine,  and  by  way  of  parenthesis  ("  that  is  mixed  with  a  little 
pure  water"),  this  will  look  rather  like  explaining  an  old  Law  than  imposing 
a  new  one ;  and  the  more  so,  because  the  Office  from  whence  yours  was 
chiefly  taken,  I  mean  the  1st  Liturgy  of  Edw.  YL,  in  that  same  Rubrick, 


JOHN  FALCONAB,  129 

orders  a  little  pure  water  to  be  mixed  w1  the  Sacramental  Wine.  The  2d 
alteration  is  the  omitting  the  whole,  or  at  least  the  later  part  of  the  Title  of 
the  Prayer  "for  the  whole  state  of  Christ's  Church,"  which  is  likewise 
omitted  in  the  Form  before  mentioned.  This,  too,  will  look  rather  like  an 
omission  than  an  innovation,  and  at  the  same  time  take  off  an  objection 
which  is  made  by  some  of  our  friends,  that  you  exclude  the  faithful  departed 
from  your  most  solemn  act  of  Worship,  and  by  that  means  virtually  refuse 
Communion  wl  them.  These  Books,  so  Printed  by  money  collected  for  that 
use,  may  be  distributed  ///•<///*  thro'  ye  whole  Kingdom,  and  the  use  of  them 
recommended,  if  not  positively  enjoined,  by  the  Bishops.  And  I  doubt  not 
but  in  a  little  time,  thro'  the  regard  which  the  more  learned  of  ye  Clergy 
will  have  to  the  alterations  themselves,  and  the  weaker  judgments  to  the 
authority  of  their  former  Bishops  and  Prince  enjoining  the  use  of  the  Scots 
Form,  it  will  be  universally  received.  Nor  do  I  think  the  alterations  I  have 
mentioned  any  reason  why  it  may  not  properly  be  called  "  The  Communion 
Office  according  to  the  Liturgy  of  the  Ch.  of  Scotl(1;"  for  under  that  Title  I 
believe  it  will  go  best  down  wt  ye  people.  I  say  I  do  not  think  them  any 
reason,  because  the  1st  of  them  is  only  an  explanation  of  a  Kubrick,  and  the 
later  is  only  the  Title  of  a  Prayer,  which  affects  the  Worship  no  otherwise 
than,  as  it  now  stands,  it  too  much  restricts  the  sense  of  the  Prayer,  and  the 
whole  Service  following. 

Thus,  Sir,  I  have  shewed  you  what  I  think  a  gentle  and  inoffensive  way 
of  returning  to  a  liule  which  your  forcfa>'rs  laid  down  for  you  to  walk  by — a 
way  to  restore  uniformity  at  home  and  to  preserve  an  amicable  Correspon 
dence  wt  your  Brethren  in  Engld;  and  not  only  w*  them,  but  w*  all  ye 
Saints,  Martyrs,  and  Confessors  who  have  gone  before  us ;  and  lastly,  a  way 
to  honour  Christ  in  his  own  Institution,  and  advantage  ourselves  by  that 
most  solemn  and  prevailing  address  to  Heaven.  These,  Sir,  arc  most  desir 
able  ends,  and  the  means  of  attaining  them  worth  enquiring  after,  tho  some 
little  worldly  inconvenience  should  threaten  us  in  our  pursuit  after  them. 

If  you  think  this  a  proper  method,  I  desire  you  propose  it  to  the  Lord 
Bishop  of  Fdr,  for  it  may  be  more  regarded  when  offered  by  you  than  me  ; 
and  if  you  will  do  me  the  favour  of  a  line,  pray  direct  for  me  to  the  care  of 
Mr.  Cockburn,  the  Minister  in  this  place.  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  Servant,  F.  PECK. 

If  this  finds  you  at  Craighall,  pray  give  my  service  to  the  Laird  and 
family. 

Bishop  Falconar  declined  the  proposal  of  a  S}7nodical  Resolu 
tion,  and  at  the  same  time  wrote  to  Bishop  Rose,  expressing  his 
hope  that  the  Usages  were  not  urged  as  "  necessary,  if  not 
essential;"  and  his  opinion  that  they  were  indeed  Apostolical, 
and  their  restoration  most  desirable. 

VOL.  II.  R 


130  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

A  few  days  previously,  Bishop  Campbell  had  written  to  Bishop 
Rose,  desiring  that  at  least  the  ^Fixture,  the  Invocation  rightly 
placed,  and  tic  omission  of  Militant,  &:?.,  might  be  established 
by  the  Scottish  Church  as  a  basis  of  Unity.  Without  this,  he 
would  not  Communicate  with  her.  On  May  20th,  he  wrote  to 
Bishop  Falconar  to  the  same  effect. 


Sir,—  I  had  yours  hy  Mr.  Crighton,  whereby  I  understand  that  you 
wisely  declined  Mr.   Peck's  overture  of  a  Synodical  Decision,  which  in  o  in- 
present  circumstances  is  scarce  practicable  to  any  good  purpose,  and  might 
readily  enough  involve  us  in  divisions  and  confusions.     We  have  before  our 
eyes  into  what  a  tragical  state  our  neighbour  Church  is  brought  by  these 
controverted  and,  I  think,  rashly  decided  points;   wherefore,  I  suppose  we 
shall  find  ourselves  concerned  to  go  on  by  leisurely  and  well-advised  steps. 
I  should  be  very  willing  to  write  to  our  Brethren  on  both  sides  in  the  terms 
you  advise,  if  the  state  of  their  affair  could  allow  it,  that  is,  if  your  charit 
able  supposition  that  these  matters  arc  not  considered  as  necessary,  if  not 
essential,  were  really  so;   but,  in  my  humble  opinion,  when  you  take  a 
review  of  the  Answer  to  the  X»  Ibwon*,  you  will  find  it  otherwise,  and 
particularly  as  to  the  xga^a,  of  which  it  is  expressly  said  that  it  is  instituted, 
commanded,  and  necessary,  a  necessary  part  of  the  matter  of  that  Sacra 
ment,  if  not  essential,  and  as  much  necessary  as  Wine  itself,  being  both  of 
them  in  the  Institution.     I  shall  say  nothing  of  the  other  points,  which,  to 
my  thought,  arc  screwed  up  as  high  as  that  which  I  have  mentioned  ;  and, 
in  consequence  to  this,  Mr.  Peck,  who  I  presume  is  fully  instructed  by  his 
constituents,  so  far  as  I  can  learn,  has  not  been  at  any  Meeting-house  in 
this  City  since  his  coining  to   it,  where   in  the  ordinary  Service  there  is 
nothing  to  scruple  him,  save  bidding  to  pray  for  Christ's  Church  militant, 
&c.     Neither  did  he  scruple  to  own  to  me  that  the  Ch.  of  Engld,  as  formerly 
constituted,   was  no   Church,   as  wanting  these  things  insisted  on  to  be 
restored  ;  and  besides  this,  I  have  seen  doleful  Letters  from  ladies  and  other 
Lay  persons  of  the  old  Communion,  from  London,  bemoaning  that  there  is 
nothing  more  openly  and  industriously  handed  'about  by  the  restoring  party, 
than  yt  the  other  is  no  Church,  and  have  no  Sacraments.     Now,  in  this 
woful  circumstance,  I  know  not  by  what  topicks  to  press  a  mutual  forbear 
ance  or  re-union  :  it  is  not  practicable  011  the  side  of  those  who  think  these 
primitive  Usages  essential  and  necessary,  unless  they  abate  something  of 
that  rigour,  and  qualify  what  they  are  generally  supposed  to  have  said  and 
writ  concerning  them;    nay,  they  have  openly  declared  that  they  cannot 
Communicate  wt  the  other  side  unless  that,  in  practice  at  least,  they  fall  in 


JOHN  FALCONAK.  131 

wl  these  Usages.  The  other  side  plead  that  they  arc  provided  wl  a  sufficient 
Liturgy,  tho  not  so  completely  perfect  but  that  it  may  be  Lettered,  yet  a 
Liturgy  the  Lest  now  in  the  world,  approveii  and  in  long  use  by  their  Church  ; 
that  it  is  cast  off  wWt  a  sufficient  authority ;  y1  by  falling  in  w*  practices 
not  enjoined  by  it,  and  strongly  pleaded  for  as  necessary  even  to  the  very 
being  of  a  Church,  they  cannot  avoid  the  being  construed  to  go  into  that 
rigid  opinion,  and  thereby  throw  an  indelible  reproach  upon  the  Church, 
give  the  greatest  advantage  imaginable  to  Atheists,  Deists,  Dissenters, 
Papists,  and  enemies  of  all  sorts,  and  open  a  door  likewise  for  pressing  upon 
them  as  necessary  other  Usages,  pretended  to  be  primitive,  till  Clod  knows 
where  it  shall  end.  "Wherefore,  in  my  humble  opinion,  seeing  that  matters 
are  come  to  an  open  rupture,  and  that  Controversy,  new  among  Protestants, 
stands  not  so  much  upon  the  foot  of  expedience  or  inexpedieuce,  lawfulness 
or  unlawfulness,  primitiveness  or  not  (for  all  primitive  Usages  are  not 
necessary),  but  are  stated  in  the  terms  of  Necessity  or  No-Necessity,  we 
wave  any  interposing  in  this  matter  untill  we  see,  if  not  the  issue  and  end  of 
this  debate,  yet  at  least  something  farther  into  it  (new  pieces  are  preparing 
to  come  abroad  Jiiiir  i/nl,-) ;  for  till  one  party  iinds  itself  at  a  loss  in  point  of 
argum1  and  reason,  I  see  no  hope  of  succeeding  in  any  enterprise  of  Accom 
modation,  and  by  y1  time  we  shall  perchance  be  better  able1,  and  upon  solid 
groiinds,  to  determine  ourselves,  and  give  our  opinion,  which  may  readily  have 
the  greater  weight,  as  being  upon  due  deliberation,  and  that  probably  it  may 
find  the  contending  parties  in  a  better  disposition  toward  peace  and  agree 
ment  than  they  seem  to  be  at  present.  As  for  my  own  part,  seeing  so  much 
stress  is  laid  upon  them,  I  am  very  desirous  of  farther  information,  being 
resolved,  God  willing,  if  I  find  these  Usages  strictly  necessary,  to  embrace 
them,  together  w1  all  the  disadvantages  that  may  attend  them  ;  if  only 
lawful,  some  way  useful  and  desirable,  prudence  in  this  case,  and  in  such 
cases  only,  ought  to  be  consulted. 

These,  wl  respect  to  what  you  advise  me,  are  my  present  thoughts. 
Perchance  they  may  change  ;  for  the  truth  is,  thro'  my  long  indisposition,  I 
am  so  faint,  and  my  spirits  so  low,  that  I  cannot,  wl  any  due  attention  or 
fixedness,  think  upon  any  thing.  I  have  sent  you  a  Pamphlet  ;  perchance 
you  have  not  seen  it.  You  need  not  so  hastily  return  it,  for  I  may  have  tho 
use  of  another  Copy  if  I  need  it.  I  am  perfectly  wearied  out  w1  writing  this, 
wherefore  I  shall  say  no  more,  save  y1 

I  am,  Sir, 
Your  most  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Sen4, 

(Signed)  A.  E. 

I  had  almost  forgot  to  condole  the  late  loss  of  our  worthy  and  dear 
brother  (meaning  Bishop  Chrystie  at  Kinross).  I  judge  it  may  be  necessary, 
upon  sev1  accounts,  to  provide  another  in  his  stead,  and  I  intrcat  }4  you 
would  have  your  thoughts  concerning  one  for  y*  effect,  that  when  we  shall 
have  occasion  to  meet  together,  that  work  may  be  done,  among  others  which 


132  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

may  occasion  our  meeting.     What  would  you  think  oi'  our  friend  at  Calen 
dar  ?      [Meaning  Mr.  (afterward  Bishop)  Irvine] . 

Directed  to  the  llcvcrcud  Mr.  John  Falconar,  at  Carnbec. 


Sir> The  very  next  Post  after  I  received  your  last,  I  wrote  to  Mr. 

Fullarton  to  he  here  about  the  end  of  this  month  if  possible,  having  ac 
quainted  him  of  your  intended  journey;  I  told  him  likewise  you  was  to  go 
off  about  the  beginning  of  the  next  month  ;  and  if  my  Letter  should  be  slow 
iu  coming  to  him,  or  his  occasions  could  not  permit  his  coming  lii>'r  by  the 
end  of  this  month,  I  believed  yl  I  should  prevail  with  you  to  put  off  your 
journey  till  the  10  or  12  of  the  next,  which,  if  need  be,  I  intreat  and  hope 
you  will  agree.  I  desired  him,  so  soon  as  he  got  my  Letter,  to  give  me  a 
Return,  signifying  his  Dyct,  yl  I  may  have  occasion  to  advertise  you  of  it, 
wdl,  God  willing,  I  shall  not  fail  to  do.  Mr.  Peck  continues  still  here, 
notwithstanding'that  8  or  10  days  agone  he  asked  my  commands  for  Lon 
don.  I  told  him  yl  I  would  write  wl  him,  and  repeated  to  him  what  I  had 
told  him  long  agone,  wch  was  yl  I  believed  we  would  not  explain  ourselves 
in  the  matter  of  the  controverted  points,  untill  we  saw  the  issue  of  the 
Controvcrsie.  I  have  not  seen  him  here  since,  which  makes  me  think  that 
he  is  still  here.  I  am  afraid  this  may  miss  the  Post,  therefore  shall  say  no 
more,  save  that  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  humble  Servant, 

(Signed)  A.  E. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Falcouar. 

YIII.— Another  Letter  from  the  Jlixlmp  of  Edinlninjli  to  llishop  Falconar,  Dated 
from  Edinluryh,  October  2. 

Reverend  Brother,— I  am  sorry  to  see  your  last  to  me  written  w*  ano'r 
hand  than  your  own,  and  much  more  for  the  occasion  of  it.  I  pray  God  to 
give  you  a  speedy  deliverance  from  this  trouble,  wcb,  thu  I  principally  wish  for 
your  own  sake,  yet  I  am  not  unconcerned  at  the  disappointm1  it  might  occa 
sion  if  it  continue  any  time  w*  you  ;  for  this  afternoon  I  had  a  Letter  from 
Mr.  Fullarton,  promising  y1  he"  shall,  God  willing,  be  here  against  the  8  or 
9  instant,  and  bidding  me  tryst  you  here  agl  that  time.  There  is  now  no 
time  for  stopping  his  journey,  o>rwise  I  would  do  it.  Wherefore,  as  it  is 
necessary  to  put  our  affairs  in  some  tolerable  order,  whatever  may  happen 
to  e>-r  of  us,  so  if  you  should  happen  to  continue  disabled,  let  me  know  if 
you  think  it  advisable  that  I  and  the  o>r  persons  concerned  should  come  to 
you,  for  I  had  ra^r  risque  my  health  than  y*  work  should  not  be  done,  for 
God  knows  when  we  may  meet  again.  Pray  let  me  hear  from  you  as  soon 
as  possible.  I  can  say  no  more  lest  this  may  miss  the  Post.  I  ana,  Sir, 
Your  very  affectionate  humble  Servant,  A.  E. 


JOHN  FALCONAE.  133 

I  had  your  Letter  and  Mr.  Fullarton's  this  day  almost  w'in  an  hour  of 
one  anoyr. — To  the  Hd  Mr.  J.  F.,  at  Carnbee. 

N.B. — In  pursuance  of  the  above  Concert  on  October  '22  thereafter,  Mr. 
"William  Irvine  and  Mr.  Arthur  Millar  were  Consecrated  Bishops  at  Ed1'  by 
Bishop  Hose  of  Ed1',  Bishop  Eullarton,  and  Bishop  Ealcouar. 

On  the  22d  October,  1718,  Bishop  Falconar,  after  a  severe 
attack  of  gout,  was  able  to  journey  from  Carnbee  to  Edinburgh, 
to  join  Bishops  Hose  and  Fullarton  in  Consecrating  Millar  and 
William  Irvine.  The  latter  was  a  decided  Anti-Usagcr.  To  the 
former,  a  great  friend,  Bishop  Falconar  wrote  a  month  after 
wards  :  "  Tho  I  have  nothing  worth  your  while  to  read,  yet  it  is 
comfortable  to  converse  with  one  whom  I  value,  by  the  way  wdl, 
for  ought  I  know,  God  hath  established  to  supply  the  defect  of 
the  presence  of  friends."  Alluding  to  "the  desolations  of  this 
afflicted  Church,"  he  adds,  "there  is  no  shipwreck  of  that  kind 
wch  is  more  at  heart  with  me  than  that  of  St.  Andrewes,  wch  I 
reckon  a  distinguisht  place,  by  marks  of  regard  more  than  one. 
I  purpose,  by  God's  assistance,  to  attempt  Confirming  of  the 
well-disposed  Students,  and  to  perform  Worship  and  administer 
the  Sacraments  to  the  good  people  in  that  place,  who  are  under 
a  great  destitution ;  but  this  with  outmost  sccrcsy  and  caution, 
insomuch  that  I  purpose  to  try  if  something  may  be  done  this 
way  on  such  week  dayes  as  are  less  opposed  to  observation." 
In  writing  to  Bishop  Millar  on  the  3d  March,  1719,  he  mentions 
that  he  had  withheld  "the  Great  Benefit"  from  two  women  at 
St.  Andrews,  the  relict  and  daughter  of  a  Clergyman  (Mr. 
Andrew  Fleukar),  for  being  at  strife  with  the  daughter's  husband. 

IX. — A  Letter  from  Bishop  Spiiickcs  to  ]}ixhop  F«lcon<ir,  D<ited  April  2,  1720. 

I!4  Reverend  Sir, — Though  I  have  never  yet  attempted  to  give  you  the 
trouble  of  a  Letter  since  I  had  the  honour  of  your  conversation  here,  I 
cannot  forbear  at  present  most  heartily  to  condole  with  you  upon  the  unex 
pected  loss  of  that  truly  great  and  excellent  Prelate,  the  L(l  Bishop  of  Edr, 
who  has  so  worthily  presided  over  your  Ch.  for  so  long  a  time.  It  was  a 
singular  blessing  that  God  was  graciously  pleased  to  spare  him  till  now,  for 
the  benefit  and  advantage  of  those  under  his  inspection,  in  such  distracted 
times  as  we  have  had.  And  it  is  a  heavy  stroke  to  others,  tho  an  unspeak 
able  gain  to  himself,  that  he  is  now  removed  into  another  world,  where  we 


131  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

may,  however,  comfort  ourselves  wl  an  assurance  y*  lie  rests  from  his  labours, 
and  his  good  works  follow  him. 

And  now,  Sir,  that  you  come  to  succeed  in  his  room,  and  to  have  the 
care,  for  which  he  was  so  eminently  conspicuous,  derived  upon  you,  I 
humbly  beseech  Almighty  Clod  to  endow  you  w1  such  a  portion  of  his  Sp1  as 
that  you  may  always  proceed  w*  the  same  vigour  and  courage,  w1  the  same 
care  and  prudence  and  circumspection,  the  same  religion  and  piety,  that  he 
did,  and  the  same  success  for  God's  honour  and  the  peace  and  welfare  of  His 
Church,  which  has  so  happily  dwelt  in  unity,  and  not  fallen  into  divisions, 
as  to  the  grief  of  my  soul,  I  must  confess,  we  have  done  here.  It  is  a  very 
ticklish  time  wheivin  you  are  now  called  to  exert  yourself;  but  your 
abilities  for  so  high  a  station  are  so  well  known,  that  I  promise  myself  you 
will  not  fail  to  supply  his  place  to  the  full  satisfaction  of  all  you  arc  con 
cerned  for.  And  as  I  had  the  honour  of  a  frequent  Correspondence  w*  my 
good  Lord,  now  w*  Clod,  I  beg  to  have  the  like  freedom  wl  yourself,  whereby 
you  may  understand  the  state  of  our  affairs  upon  all  occasions,  and  we  of 
yours.  And  if  there  be  any  service  I  can  be  capable  of  doing  either  yourself 
or  any  of  our  friends  wl  you,  you  shall  at  all  times  find  me  most  ready  to  do 
the  best  I  can.  One  thing  I  have  at  present  to  communicate,  that  a  very 
worthy  friend  of  mine,  Mr.  lligdeu,  very  lately  returned  some  money  to  my 
good  La  of  Fdr,  which  he  is  not  sure  arrived  at  y1  place  before  his  Lordship's 
Death,  tho  possibly  it  might.  If  I  mistake  not,  it  was  50  pounds  ;  and  I 
here  take  notice  of  it,  y*  if  it  did  not  come  before,  you  may  please  to  make 
what  inquiry  you  can  after  it,  for  I  have  not  yet  heard  by  whom  it  was  sent. 
I  expect,  also,  y1  he  will  have  some  more  in  no  long  time.  Twenty  pounds 
I  have  heard  of  in  one  County,  and  ten  in  another,  y*  fell  not  into  Dr. 
Sharp's  hands  ;  but  I  do  not  find  y*  cither  of  these  sums  are  returned  hither. 
If  you  will  please  to  send  me  word  by  any  one  y1  comes  to  this  place  (to  my 
house  in  White  Fryars,  London),  what  way  you  desire  to  have  this,  or  any 
thing  else,  yl  may  be  got  conveyed  to  you,  I  will  be  sure  to  give  direction 
accordingly.  I  am,  w*  great  sincerity  and  respect,  Rl  Reverend  Sir, 
Your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  Servant, 

NATHANIEL  SPINCKES. 
This  for  ye  Reverend  Mr.  Falconar,  at  Ed1". 

X. — .1  Letter  from  Hisltnp  Collier  to  J>i*hap  Falconar,  London,  May  20,  1720. 

Sir,— I  understand  by  your  last  to  Mr.  C bell,  y*  you  have  seen  a 

Letter  from  our  old  friends  at  London,  in  which  they  charge  us  w*  having 
been  the  occasion  of  carrying  numbers  to  ye  Ch.  of  Rome,  into  the  Revolu 
tion,  and,  which  is  still  much  worse,  into  Atheism  itself.  First,  supposing 
the  matter  of  fact  true,  and  if  some  of  our  people  had  deserted  all  these 
ways,  which  way  are  we  to  blame  for  their  running  into  Heterodoxy  ?  Our 
Principles  and  "Worship,  I'm  sure,  as  you  justly  observe,  have  not  the  least 
tendency  to  misguide  them ;  on  the  contrary,  they  are  better  preservatives 


JOHN  FALCONAB.  135 

against  Popery,  as  has  been  proved,  than  those  of  our  old  Brethren.  And 
why  should  the  ignorance,  inconstancy,  or  other  undue  motives,  be  charged 
upon  us  ?  But,  besides,  they  misreport  the  matter.  I  know  but  of  4  or  5 
yt  have  gone  from  us  to  the  Church  of  Pi.,  one  of  which  is  Dr.  Sharp,  who 
perverted  another,  who,  to  speak  softly,  has  a  very  unhappy  character. 
Another  is  one  Minors,  a  Clergyman,  who  went  off  upon  his  exception 
agl  the  validity  of  the  Ch.  of  Engld's  Orders  at  the  Reformation,  which 
objection  would  have  carried  him  from  our  old  friends  no  less  than  from  us. 
But  then,  as  we  have  lost  some,  we  have  stopped  and  recovered  as  many  ; 
and,  which  is  farther  to  be  observed,  our  old  friends  have  lost  some  to  ye 
Ch.  of  Biomc,  and  scv1  to  ye  Publick  Congregations.  And  as  to  ye  charge  of 
Schism,  it  is  no  better  than  arraigning  the  Primitive  Church,  w1  whom  our 
Worship  agrees,  in  all  the  4  points  we  differ  from  them.  Besides,  their 
calling  us  Schismaticks  comes  wt  a  very  ill  grace  from  them,  who  admit 
those  whom  they  know  Members  of  the  complying  Church  to  their  Com 
munion.  Two  of  their  chiefs  defend  this  latitude,  and  the  3d  joins  wt  them  : 
this  is  uncontestible  matter  of  fact. 

Sir,  I  hope  the  revival  of  the  4  primitive  things  gains  ground  in  your 
Country.     I  pray  God  preserve  you  in  health  and  happiness,  and 

I  am,  Sir, 
Your  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Servant, 

J.  COLLIER. 
To  the  Pieverend  Mr.  Falconar. 


XI.  —  Another  from  llidmp  Sjiiiicliex  to  Jiin/ioji  Falconttr,  Dated  3I(ii/  23. 

Et  Pieverend  and  Kind  Sir,  —  Several  intervening  businesses  made  me 
later  than  I  ought  to  have  been  in  acknowledging  your  goodness  and  favour, 
in  not  only  pardoning  the  freedom  of  my  late  application  to  you,  but,  more 
over,  vouchsafing  me  a  most  obliging  answer,  w1  an  Ace*  of  the  posture  of 
affairs  at  the  time,  and  a  promise  to  oblige  me  yet  farther  w*  a  Kelation  of 
what  should  be  determined  at  your  intended  Meeting,  the  news  whereof  will 
be  highly  acceptable  amongst  us.  And  ye  rather  because  I  promise  myself 
yl  will  give  us  a  full  assurance  of  what  I  am  already  told,  yt  you  have  a 
singular  unanimity  amongst  all  Orders  ;  at  which  not  only  I,  but  others  also, 
exceedingly  rejoice,  and  pray  for  a  long  continuance  of  it.  And,  indeed,  we 
cannot  but  be  the  more  nearly  affected  wt  your  enjoying  so  valuable  a 
blessing,  by  reason  of  our  own  unhappy  want  of  it.  Blessed  be  God,  we 
were  for  a  long  time  at  unity,  and  in  perfect  harmony  wt  one  another,  and 
whatever  trouble  any  of  us  at  any  time  met  with  from  other  adversaries,  we 
lived  like  Brethren  in  peace  and  love,  and  wtout  fear  or  apprehension  of  any 
breach  amongst  ourselves.  But  since  it  has  pleased  God  to  suffer  disscn- 
tions  to  arise,  and  a  new  unthought-of  sect  to  set  up  in  opposition  to  the 
Ch.  of  Engld,  to  the  grievance  of  our  souls  and  the  joy  of  our  Piomish  and 
other  enemies,  we  cannot  but  most  heartily  congratulate  your  greater  advan- 


130  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

tagc  in  Laving  so  comfortable  an  agreem1  preserved  amongst  you  all.  And 
tliO  Almighty  God  lias  in  His  infinite  wisdom  thought  lit  to  remove  your 
most  useful  and  excellent  head  from  any  longer  presiding  over  your  poor 
oppressed  Church,  his  place  appears  to  he  so  admirably  tilled  w1  yourself, 
and  those  other  wise  and  judicious,  as  well  as  pious  and  learned,  Prelates, 
who  stand  up  in  his  stead,  and  have  the  whole  care  now  devolved  upon  you, 
yt  your  great  loss  will  hereby  be  made  casie  to  those  committed  to  your 
charge.  And  may  the  Divine  blessing  and  the  Holy  Sp1  be  wl  you  all,  to 
assist  and  strengthen  you,  and  carry  you  successfully  thro'  all  the  trials  you 
may  have  to  conflict  w1  in  the  weighty  service  whereto,  in  His  good  Provid 
ence,  Clod  has  been  pleased  to  call  you  all ! 

I  am  heartily  glad  my  good  friend  Mr.  Invin  is  one  of  you,  as  well 
knowing  how  well  fitted  he  is  for  such  a  station,  and  how  truly  usefull  you 
will  find  him  upon  all  occasions.  When  you  shall  either  sec  or  write  to 
him,  be  pleased  to  give  him  my  very  hearty  service,  and  wishes  of  all  happi 
ness  to  him.  And  y*  you  will  be  pleased  likewise  to  accept  the  same  yourself, 
is  the  unfeigned  request  of,  Rl  Reverend  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  humble  Servant, 

]ST.  SPIXCKES. 

This  for  the  Reverend  Mr.  Falconar,  at  Edr. 

XII. ,1  Letter  from  ]jit>Ji»p  Sj, inches  to  Didm/i  FoJcnucn;  at  KeJ/ie  fin  tin' 

direct  inn  ),  Ait/fitst  19. 

Rt  Reverend  Sir,— The  favour  of  your  kind  Letter  of  July  7th,  I  have 
now  before  me,  and  am  obliged  to  beg  your  acceptance  of  my  unfeigned 
hearty  thanks  for  the  same,  and  in  particular  for  your  undeserved  courtesie 
and  civilities  whcrcw1  you  have  been  pleased  to  treat  me  in  it.  I  am  truly 
sorry  yt  you  have  occasion  to  complain  of  the  gout ;  tho  perhaps  it  may  be  a 
troublesome  sort  of  physick  to  you,  and  as  it  often  proves,  and  I  hope  it  will 
wl  you,  a  means  of  prolonging  life.  I  must  agree  wt  you  y1  writing  by  the 
Post  will  scarce  be  at  all  convenient.  But  if  we  can  have  convenience  of 
conveyance  by  a  private  hand,  I  am  apt  to  think  there  may  be  no  danger  in 
that,  and  shall  therefore  be  very  thankful  if  you  will  be  so  kind  as  to  favour 
me  wl  some  information  yt  way,  as  you  shall  have  opportunity.  For  1 
cannot  but  be  desirous  of  understanding  the  state  of  your  Ch. ;  as  also,  on 
the  other  hand,  I  conclude  you  will  think  it  proper  to  understand  the  state 
of  ours.  The  motion  you  mention,  yt  only  ye  old  Presbyters  should  have 
the  privilege  of  voting,  seems  to  have  been  too  hard  upon  their  other 
Brethren ;  and  it  is  happy  you  found  them  so  disposed  as  to  recede  from  it, 
as  in  all  reason  they  ought  to  do.  And  I  beseech  Almighty  God  yt  you  may 
meet  wt  no  more  disputes  of  that  nature. 

Though  it  were  to  be  wished  in  clever  Church  the  method  of  adminis 
tering  Holy  Offices  were  ye  same,  yet  the  case  wt  you  is  very  different  from 
yours  in  y*  respect.  You  have  no  settled  Liturgy  since  the  Reformation ; 


JOHN  FALCON AR.  1«7 

and  so,  tlio  yon  have  been  so  liappy  as  to  introduce  the  use  of  a  Liturgy  in 
your  "Worship  since  the  Revolution,  yet  are  you  not  so  tied  to  any  one  Form 
as  we  are.  Besides,  it  is  a  great  happiness  to  you  that  you  have  no  scandal, 
breach  of  Communion,  animosities,  or  disputes,  amongt  you,  whereas  we 
labour  under  them  all.  Had  our  Brethren  taken  some  liberty  in  breaking 
thro'  our  Rubrick.  for  the  sake  of  things  not  necessary.  th<">  we  should  have 
blamed  them,  and  have  been  sorry  for  so  unwarrantable  a  practice,  yet  we 
should  have  been  very  loth  to  have  broken  oil'  Communion  wl  them,  in  hope 
yt  they  might  in  time  have  considered  better,  and  returned  to  their  former 
practice.  And  it  is  a  deep  affliction  to  us  that  they  have  proceeded  to  depart 
from  us,  and  set  up  an  opposite  Communion.  And  what  ye  sad  consequents 
of  y{  are  I  need  not  tell  you.  It  is  very  kind  in  you  to  study  a  method  of 
accommodation  between  us.  And.  as  to  what  you  mention  of  not  writing 
any  more,  I  make  no  doubt  it  will  readily  be  agreed  to  on  our  side,  provided 
the  others  will  agree  to  the  same.  There  is  a  Book  now  in  the  Press,  from 
what  Author  I  know  not,  which  yet  I  will  heartily  endeavour  to  get  stopt, 
and  I  believe  I  shall  be  able  to  do  it  upon  an  assurance  yl  they  will  likewise 
stop  all  on  their  side.  If  they  will  not  agree  to  this,  I  see  not  what  reason 
there  can  be  for  our  being  silent  more  than  they.  And  if  there  be  anything 
else  you  shall  think  proper  to  propose  to  us,  y*  is  consistent  w1  ye  obligation 
to  observe  the  Orders  and  Injunctions  of  ye  Ch.  whereof  we  arc  Members,  I 
dare  answer  for  my  Brethren,  as  well  as  myself,  y*  it  shall  be  very  thank 
fully  received,  and  be  attended  to  wl  all  ye  respect  and  consideration  due  to 
qt  comes  from  persons  of  your  singular  worth  and  learning.  And  we  shall, 
moreover,  think  ourselves  highly  obliged  to  you  for  so  desirable  an  inter 
posal,  in  so  mclancholick  a  case  as  ours  is.  In  ye  meantime,  I  promise 
myself,  yt  as  we  pray  for  your  deliverance  from  the  severe  trials  and  hard 
ships  you  arc  forced  to  conflict  w(,  so  likewise,  on  ye  other  hand,  we  shall 
not  want  your  intercessions,  for  the  repairing  our  breaches,  and  restoring 
unity  and  concord  amongst  us.  I  am,  w*  great  sincerity  and  respect, 
Your  m.  all',  and  m.  lumib.  Servant  and  Brother, 

X.  SPINCKES. 

XIII. — Another  Letter /rout  Jllnhop  Sjiinclrs  to  BinJn>j>  Folconar,  I\[<ii/I21,  1721. 

R.  R.  Sir, — I  hope  you  received  a  Letter  y1  Mr.  Strachan  did  me  the 
kindness  to  send  for  me  the  last  summer  in  answer  to  yours,  wherein  you 
was  so  very  kind  as  mention  the  thought  of  making  some  proposals  for  an 
accommodation  between  our  separating  Brethren  and  ourselves,  which  I 
begged  to  see,  and  promised  yt  I  should  for  my  part,  and  I  did  not  doubt  but 
my  Brethren  too,  would  be  very  glad  of,  and  ready  to  comply  wl  any  thing 
y*  might  be  consistent  wt  our  obedience  to  the  Rubrick,  and  our  obligations 
to  the  Ch.  we  arc  of.  And  I  cannot  think  that  more  than  this  can  in  reason 
and  conscience  be  expected  from  us.  I  waited  for  some  considerable  time 
in  hope  you  would  have  done  me  the  honour  of  acquainting  me  w1  your 
VOL.  n. 


I;->R  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

thoughts  hereupon  ;  and  should  have  Riven  you  ye  trouble  of  another  Letter 
upon*  the  same  subject,  had  it  not  pleased  Almighty  (loci  to  visit  me  wl  a 
series  of  sicknesses  for  the  greatest  part  of  the  last  winter,  and  from  which 
I  am  very  laldy  recovered;  and,  blessed  be  God  that  I  am  so,  and  hope  I 
may  continue  so.  Th<>,  if  it  should  prove  otherwise,  His  will  be  done; 
for'l  alwise  desire  to  be  rather  at  His  disposal  than  my  own,  and  to  have 
Him  chuse  for  me  than  myself. 

I  hope.  Sir.  you  have  had  your  health,  and  may  you  long  enjoy  that 
singular  blessing,  both  for  your  own  sake  and  of  those  under  your  care,  to 
whom  it  will  bo  a  blessing  as  well  as  to  yourself.  \Ve  hear  great  slaughter 
has  been  made  amongst  the  gentlemen  of  your  Country,  by  our  wicked  as 
well  as  unhappy  South  Sea.  l>ut  1  perswade  myself  you  have  escaped  that 
wreck,  the  (lovernm1  having  long  -ince  taken  care  of  the  Jacobites,  yl  if  any 
of  them  had  been  inclined  to  have  run  in  amongst  the  rest,  they  would  not 
be  exposed  to  the  temptation,  for  want  of  money  to  venture  wl  them,  and  so 
are  easy  in  themselves,  whilst  many  others,  who  have  lived  long  upon  the 
plunder  of  the  Nation,  are  now  become  as  poor  as  we.  Abundance  of  our 
people,  both  great  and  small,  are  in  a  miserable  condition;  and,  after  all  ye 
care  our  Senators  have  taken,  are  greatly  afraid  y*  the  mountain  will  at  last 
brimc  f<>i-th  a  mouse.  1  have  not  the  honour  to  be  known  to  the  11.  It.  Mr. 
Fullartoun;  but  I  have  begged  of  Mr.  Irwyn,  and  heg  also  of  you,  Sir,  that 
when  you  shall  see  him  next,  you  will  do  me  the  favour  to  give  him  my  very 
humble  service  and  hearty  congratulation  upon  his  being  advanced  to  the 
station  he  now  so  justly  and  so  worthily  possesses.  1  hope  you  may  all 
escape  w<out  great  danger,  or  damage,  or  trouble,  during  the  time  of  the 
General  Assembly,  now  met.  You  have  the  same  gracious  Protector  you 
have  had  formerly ;  and  yl  He  will  condescend  to  protect  you  agl  all  ye 
attempts  of  your  most  outragious  adversarys,  is  the  sincere  prayer  of, 

It.  It.  Sir, 
Your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  Servant, 

NATHANIEL   SriN'CKics. 

This  for  the  Reverend  Mr.  Falconar. 

On  January  10,  1721,  Falconar  wrote  a  long  Letter  to  Bishop 
Campbell,  in  which  he  says— "  My  charge  is  excceclinglic  en 
larged,  and  the  regard  I  have  to  the  great  and  good  Master  to 
Whom  I  am  responsible,  will  not  allow  me  to  do  His  work 
negligentlie ;  and  in  the  discharge  of  this  great  trust,  wch  is  very 
disproportioned  to  my  power,  there  occur,  and  that  frequentlie, 
verie  many  difficulties,  wch  necessarilic  require  the  help  of  others 
more  knowing  and  more  prudent  than  myself.  There  arc  many 
of  our  Brethren,  within  that  District  assigned  to  me,  who  use  the 


JOHN  FALCOXA1L  180 

Scotch  Liturgie,  omit  'militant,'  and  use  the  Mixture,  being 
induc'd  to  that  good  old  way  as  by  what  they  have  read  ;  so  //// 
;;///  example,  and  three  short  Discourses  given  them  in  wreating 
—one  about  Confirmation,  another  about  the  Eucharist,  and  a 
third  about  Preparedness  for  it.  I  have  also  recommended  to  the 
Clergy  the  use  of  some  Books,  wch  treat  some  subjects,  the 
knowledge  of  wch  is  necessary  at  all  times,  but  more  especiallie 
with  respect  to  the  present  situation  of  our  afilicted  Church  ;  and 
I  reckon  that  this  way  of  doing  will  graduaUle  diiil  tji'iillii'  lead 
them  into  an  acquaintance  and  love  of  what  is  Primitive.  I  much 
incline  to  transmit  to  you  all  these  things,  together  with  a  Form 
of  Prayer  for  deliverance  to  this  distressed  Church,  wch  I  think  is 
used  universallie  in  the  above  District.  This  was  done  by  me  in 
the  end  of  October  last,  throughout  the  Presbyterie  of  St. 
Andrewes,  the  whole  Shire  of  Angus,  and  that  part  of  Perthshire 
wch  is  allotted  to  me.  As  for  the  more  distant  counties  of  Mearn 
and  Aberdeen,  it  was  not  practicable  to  visit  them,  because 
winter  was  approaching.  .  .  I  must  necessarilie  throw  up  the 
inspection  of  that  hn<je  Slu're.  of  Aberdeen,  it  being  so  remote,  .  . 
and  this  is  the  chief  reason  why  I  incline  to  the  promotion  fo 
D.  Garden,  and  the  other." 

The  Piev.  John  Skinner  says  ;7-,VrA'.s.  7//.s7or//,  vol.  //.,  />.  007',: 
"  Mr.  Falconar  was  an  intimate  acquaintance  and  great  favourite 
of  good  Bishop  Hose,  who  pressed  him  most  warmly,  for  the  good 
of  the  Church,  to  take  the  burthen  of  the  Episcopate  upon  him 
in  these  times  of  trial  and  difficulty.  And  indeed  no  man  could 
have  been  litter  for  it  in  any  condition  of  the  Church,  as,  from 
the  many  Letters  that  remain  of  him,  he  appears  to  have  been 
not  only  a  man  of  great  piety  and  prudence,  but  likewise  a  con 
summate  Divine,  and  deeply  versed  in  the  Doctrines  and  Pates  of 
the  Primitive  Church,  which,  both  by  example  and  argument,  he 
studied  to  revive  and  bring  again  into  practice,  in  the  softest  and 
most  inoffensive  way  possible." 

Bishop  Poissell  adds,  in  his  Edition  of  Bishop  Keith's  Cata 
logue,  p.  522:  "As  a  proof  that  this  eulogy  is  not  altogether 
unfounded,  we  are  informed  that  he  was  likewise  very  highly 
esteemed  by  the  eminently  learned  Henry  Dodwell,  with  whom 


HO  J)ISTU1CT   OF  ill'E. 

he  Corresponded  relative  to  a  Book  which  he  had  intended  to 
Publish  against  Deists,  and  other  such  enemies  of  Christianity. 
Dodwell's  opinion  of  Bishop  Falconer  may  he  farther  collected 
from  a  wish  which  he  expressed  that  the  latter  would  execute  a 
Work,  projected  by  himself,  on  the  Lair*  of  Nature  <ai<l  Nation*. 
I  know  not,  however,  that  the  Bishop  did  actually  become  an 
Author.  There  is  preserved  in  Manuscript  a  little  Tract  written 
by  him  for  the  Viscountess  of  Kingston." 

This  MS.  is  now  before  me — the  Original,  and  also  a  Copy  in 
Bishop  Jolly's  own  handwriting.  On  the  former  is  this  Note  by 
Bishop  Low:  "Written  by  Bishop  Falconar,  for  the  use  of  the 
Viscountess  of  Kingston,  daughter  of  Colin,  Earl  of  Balcarras, 
and  first  Married  to  the  Karl  of  Kellie.  The  Author  was  a 
Bishop  of  the  Episcopal  Church  in  Scotland,  early  in  Eighteenth 
Century,  resided  at  Carnbee,  in  the  County  of  Fife,  and  was 
reckoned  one  of  the  best  Divines  of  his  age.  He  Married  a 
daughter  of  Galloway,  the  Lord  Dunkeld." 

This  Treatise,  as  an  exponent  of  Bishop  Falconar's  "views," 
is  now  Printed  at  the  end  of  this  Life,  for  the  first  time. 

"The  Life  of  Mr.  Henry  Dodwell ;  with  an  Account  of  his 
Works,  and  an  Abridgement  of  them  that  are  Published,  and  of 
several  of  his  Manuscripts  ;  by  Francis  Brokesby,  B.D.;  London, 
1715,"  is  now  scarce.     I  have  the  use  of  the  Copy  (2  vols.,  E. 
8.  0,  stout  bound)  in  the  Scotlixli   /<>>/.sr^m/  'Library,  wherein  is 
written—"  Alexander  Jolly,  Turriff,  1778.     Both  volumes  gifted 
by  the  llev.  Mr.  John  limes,  Deacon."     I  Transcribe  from  vol. 
iL,  p.  501:   "His  (intended)  Dissertation  concerning  the  Laws 
of  Nature  and  Nations,  and  other  Writings  left  imperfect.     .     . 
No  antecedent  reason  could  have  obliged  God  to  punish  com 
munities  for  the  crimes  of  private  persons,  had  He  not  settled 
societies.     These  thoughts  Mr.  Dodwell  has  given  us  some  stric 
tures  of  in  some  of  his  Writings,  and  particularly  in  his  Discourse 
against  Mavria<je  in   (life rent   Communions,    and   in  that    against 
Occasional   Communion;    but   more   fully  in  his    Letter   to    the 
Reverend  Mr.  John  Falconer,  a  North  Britan,  who  requested 
his  assistance  in  his  designed  Work  against  Deists  and  the  like 
adversaries  of  Christianity.     In  answer  to  which,  he  began  that 


JOHN  FALCON  All.  Ml 

Discourse  of  the  Laws  of  Nations,  which  he  broke  off,  because  it 
kindred  him  in  the  prosecution  of  his  Discourse  on  Dr.  \Vood- 
n-ard's  Shield,  in  which  he  had  then  made  some  progress;  and  at 
that  time  sent  Mr.  Falconer  a  shorter  Letter."  Page  GOO  : 
"  Mr.  Dodwell's  hypothesis  of  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul.  .  . 
The  tire  prepared  for  Evangelical  Criminals  shall  be  eternal. 
.  .  The  Atheists  themselves  <{uickly  gave  over  their  eagerness  in 
buying  my  Book,  as  my  bookseller  himself  informed  me,  when 
they  found,  upon  actual  perusal  of  it,  how  little  it  answered  their 
expectations.  The  person  who  occasioned  it,  as  soon  as  I  knew 
his  name  (which  Mr.  Gadderar  conccal'd  from  me),  and  could 
write  to  him,  and  send  the  copy  to  him,  own'd  himself  satisfy'd 
with  what  I  had  there  said.  Since  that  he  hath  seen  my  just 
defence,  and  I  have  lately  rcceiv'd  another  Letter  from  him, 
wishing  that  my  adversaries  were  satisfy'd  also.  He  (Bishop 
John  Falconar — on  the  margin  in  Bishop  Jolly's  handwriting)  is 
your  Countryman,  and  of  great  repute  among  the  Episcopals 
there." 

In  the  Scottish  Ecclesiastical  Journal,  1852-53,  there  is  given 
a  pretty  full  Digest  of  our  Bishop's  Letters  and  Papers  deposited 
in  the  Episcopal  Chest,  by  the  liev.  AYm.  Bright,  while  Professor 
of  Ecclesiastical  History  at  Trinity  College,  Glenalmond,  titled 
"Bishop  John  Falconar  and  his  Friends."  These  illustrate 
minutely  what  an  able  Correspondent,  Counsellor,  and  Divine  he 
was.  The  Letters  addressed  to  him  from  Bishops  Rattray  and 
Campbell  will  be  found  under  their  Memoirs. 


lieverend  Brethren, — The  necessitys  of  our  suffering  Brethren,  as  they 
do  daily  grow  greater,  and  at  present  press  them  very  hard,  so  our  sense  of 
this  and  sympathy  w1  them  obliges  us  to  the  most  effectual  measures  for 
their  relief ;  and  because  it  is  reasonably  to  be  presumed  that  none  will  act 
more  vigorously  for  their  interest  than  their  Brethren,  and  who  are  likewise 
fellow- sufferers  w4  them,  we  have  therefore  thought  fit  to  nominate  two 
discreet  Churchmen  in  each  Presbytery,  to  Collect  in  y1  District,  for  their 
behoof,  what  the  pious  bounty  of  Noblemen,  Gentlemen,  and  others,  shall 
incline  them  to  bestow.  And  because  we  doubt  not  but  that  upon  this  our 


M-2  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

earnest  desire,  you  will  undertake  the  managing  of  that  affair  w'in  the 
bounds  of  ye  Presbytery  of  St.  Andrews;  we  do,  therefore,  hereby  very 
earnestly  recommend  it  to  you  to  be  carried  on  w1  all  the  dispatch  conveni 
ently  you  may,  in  doing  whereof  you  will  perform  a  service  most  acceptable 
to  God,  much  needed  and  desired  by  your  afflicted  Brethren,  very  becoming 
vour  character,  and  most  obliging  to  us  who  are.  Beverend  Brethren, 
Your  affectionate  Brethren  and  Servants, 

(Signed)  Jo.  GT,.\SOO\V. 

AI.KX.  EDIXBURGEX. 

Kd1',  1  Janry.,  1707. — For  the  lleverend  Mr.  John  Falconar,  Minister 
at  Carnbce,  and  Mr.  Andrew  Bruce,  Minister  at  Pittcnwcem,  and  Mr.  John 
Keir,  Minister  at  Cults. 

X.l>. There  are  o>T  '2  Commissions  in  ye  same  words  from  ye  Bishop 

of  Kd1'  alone  to  Mr.  George  ILonyman,  Minister  at  Fivistoun,  and  Mr.  John 
Falconar,  &c.,  the  one  ]>ated  Kd1',  2  June,  170'J,  the  o>r  Kdr,  2i  August, 
1713,  Signed  both  Alex.  Kdinburgen. 

A  special  object  with  Bishop  Falconar  was  to  restore  the  use 
of  Confirmation,  which  had  been  quite  neglected  for  many  years, 
owing  to  the  Persecutions  which  the  Church  had  been  sub 
jected  to. 


. Ftilronar's  l-'onn  of  Consecrating  the  Ointment,  and  of  Confirmation,  chiefly 


tin  Aliriil'/einent  from  the  (ireek  EitchoJof/i/,  which  Gadderar  hail  Copied  J<>r 


0  God,  yo  Fa>"r  of  Lights,  from  Whom  cometh  every  good  and  perfect 
gift,  send  forth  Thy  most  Holy  Spirit  on  this  Oyl.  Make  it  the  Oyl  of 
Gladness  to  the  Sanctifying  of  the  Soul  and  Body,  the  Garment  of  Incor- 
ruption,  and  a  perfecting  Seal,  imprinting  the  holy  name  of  Thy  only 
begotten  Son  on  this  Thy  servant,  now  hallowed  by  the  Water  of  Baptism, 
that  he  being  thus  Sanctified  in  Soul  and  Body,  and  freed  from  the  dominion 
of  all  sin  and  wickedness,  may  be  safe  from  the  temptations  and  iiifestmcnts 
of  all  evil  and  impure  spirits,  and  being  numbered  among  Thy  sons  and 
adopted  into  Thy  family,  he  may  be  owned  by  Thee  before  Thy  Saints, 
Angels,  and  Archangels  ;  and  in  and  by  this  pure  and  sacred  Mystery  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Sp1  of  J.  Christ  may  enter  into  him,  and  ever  dwell  w^in 
him,  as  in  an  holy  temple,  thro'  the  same  our  Lord  J.  *fr  C.,  to  Whom, 
wl  Thee,  0  Father,  and  Thee,  0  H.  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  now 
and  evermore.  Amen. 

Almighty  and  Everlasting  God,  Who  hast  vouchsafed  to  Sanctify  this 
Thy  servant  by  the  Laver  of  Baptism,  and  hast  given  unto  him  the  forgive 
ness  of  all  his  sins,  strengthen  him,  we  beseech  Thee,  0  Lord,  wl  Thy 


JOHN  FALCONAE.  143 

II.  G.  the  Comforter,  and  daily  increase  in  him  Thy  manifold  gifts  of  Grace, 
the  Spt  of  AYisdom  and  Understanding,  the  Sp1  of  Counsel  and  Ghostly 
Strength,  the  Spt  of  Knowledge  and  true  Godliness,  and  fulfill  him,  0  Lord, 
w1  the  Spt  of  Thy  Holy  Fear.  Sign  and  mark  him  to  he  Thine  for  ever,  by 
the  virtue  of  Thy  Holy  Cross  and  Passion.  Confirm  and  strengthen  him 
wl  the  inward  Unction  of  Thy  II.  Spirit  unto  life  everlasting.  Amen. 

I  Sign  thce  wl  the  Sign  of  the  >J<  Cross,  and  Confirm  thee  wl  the 
Chrism  of  Salvation,  and  lay  mine  hands  upon  thce,  in  ye  name  of  ye  F. 
and  of  ye  S.  and  of  ye  II.  G.  Amen.  [And  continuing  hi.s  hands  on  his 
lieatr — Defend,  ()  Lord,  this  Thy  Srrvant,  &e. 

Recijx}  i/iccnfor  the  t'/iri^iii. — Use  Oil  of  Olives,  Oil  of  Xutmegs,  Cloves, 
wrta  Mixture  of  the  Balsamum  Anti-apoplecticum,  with  some  Myrrh,  Storax, 
and  other  Ingredients  thickened  to  an  Ointment. 

<'hri*nt  arm ri/iii'/  to  N.  < '//fir/nn — Mixture  of  Oil  and  Balsam. 


.  .  .  This  disease  continues  wl  me,  and  tin")  the  swelling  he  much 
abated,  yet  it  hath  so  settled  in  the  joint  that  it  is  like  to  stick  long  there, 
and  consequently  to  disable  me  from  travelling,  at  least  to  any  great 
distance. 

The  case  of  the  person  who  hath  the  important  matter  in  hand  is 
much  at  heart  wt  me,  chiefly  because  of  the  fear  I  have  that  I  shall  not  be  in 
a  condition  to  be  concurring  in  it.  And,  indeed,  I  sec  not  any  absolute 
necessity  of  my  assistance  in  yl  work,  now  y1  M.  AYh.  is  vested  with  full 
powers  for  that  and  ye  like  ministrations.  His  Deeds  will  have  the  same 
ratification  in  Heaven  ;  and  that  consent  and  approbation  woh  I  had,  is  by 
me  fairly  derived  on  him,  or  shall  be  done,  if  reckoned  needful,  by  a  formal 
Deed.  Besides,  his  performance  will  have-  this  advantage,  yt  it  may  escape, 
by  an  ordinary  prudent  management,  all  observation,  and  it  is  scarcely 
possible  to  avoid  it  if  done  by  me  or  any  o>'r.  And  when  I  lay  together  his 
Ordination  and  my  disease  meeting  in  such  a  critical  nick,  I  am  apt  to  think 
yt  Providence  intimates  it  should  be  done  by  him.  I  don't  think  there  is 
any  great  need  of  Witnesses.  For  as  these  are  necessary  only  for  the  satis 
faction  of  the  Church,  so  the  Church  desires  no  satisfaction  on  y*  subject, 
considering  the  present  situation  of  her  circumstances.  And  then,  to  ratify 
the  fact,  on  supposition  the  notoriety  of  it  be  judged  necessary  afterwards, 
this  may  and  shall  be  done  by  authcntick  written  Deeds.  And  then,  I  would 
not  have  the  person  concerned  to  consider  himself  only  as  a  Catechumen, 
or  as  one  who,  in  a  formal  sense,  is  an  alien.  Neither  of  these  'are  true, 
but  as  one  in  a  state  of  misfortune,  rather  than  of  sin,  and  who  by  y1  deed 
means  no  more  than  to  please  God,  to  satisfie  his  own  conscience,  and  secure 


144  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

his  Title.  His  preparations  should  then  lye,  in  my  weak  opinion,  in  a  sure 
perswasion  of  his  Orthodoxy,  in  humiliation  for  his  former  sins,  in  a  full 
trust  of  a  Plenary  Pardon  of  all  yt  is  bypast,  and  in  an  entire  and  voluntary 
resignation  to  Jesus,  to  live  agrecablie  to  the  terms  of  the  Holy  Covenant. 


Reverend  Brother, — The  desire  of  ye  person  you  wrote  of  seems  to  me 
to  have  great  reason  on  its  side,  and  I  wish  that  case  had  been  taken  under 
consideration,  and  decided  e-vr  by  your  own  or  any  o>'r  rightly  constituted 
Protestant  Church.  "Which,  so  far  as  I  know,  lias  not  as  yet  been  done  ; 
nay,  yC  practice  and  sense  of  our  neighbour  Church  looks  to  be  ag1  it,  upon 
what'  warrantable  principle,  or  how  agreeably  to  some  other  both  of  their 
principles  and  practices,  I  am  yet  to  learn;  but  as  for  the  thing  itself,  it 
wants  not  perplexing  dii'iiculties  on  both  sides  ;  and  the,  I  have  often  thought 
upon  it,  yet  I  must  own  that  I  am  scarce  able  to  resolve  myself  clearly  as 
to  what  may  be  lit  to  be  done  in  cases  of  yt  nature.  I  am  loth  to  annul  all 
such  Baptisms,  and  to  impeach  both  our  own  Church  and  others  that  seem  to 
allow  them,  in  so  far  yl  they  allow  those  persons  who  have'no  other,  all  Chris 
tian  Privileges.  On  the  other  hand,  I  know  not  how  to  allow  the  validity  of 
(^  is  done  wfout  a  Commission  ;  for  my  own  part.  I  make  a  difference  betwixt 
those  who  are  satisfied  or  have  no  scruple  about  their  Baptism  and  those 
who  have.  As  to  the  first,  I  reckon  their  Baptisms,  the,  invalid  in  matter 
of  right,  yet  not  so  in  matter  of  fact,  and  that  thro'  the  Divine  indulgence, 
from  the  Churches  in  W1'  they  live,  their  admission  and  acceptance  of  them, 
and  ye  insuperable  difficulties  ye  greatest  part  of  people  are  under  to  know 
otherways  ;  for  the  Churches  admitting  of  such  Baptisms,  the,  no  far>'r  than 
not  to  pass  a  censure  upon  them,  seems  to  me  to  put  these  persons  //(  loiut 
fide  to  rely  upon  such  Baptisms,  and  I  hope  y*  they  shall  sustain  no  prejudice 
'in  yt  case.  But  how  the  Govcrnours  of  the  Church  shall  account  for  afford 
ing  yl  ground  of  confidence,  I  do  not  know;  but  for  the  o>"rs,  who  upon 
maturity  of  judgem1,  after  ripe  enquiry,  and  weighty  considerations,  scruple 
the  validity  of  their  Baptism,  their  case  seems  to  be  very  different  from  yl  of 
the  others,  and  I  think  it  hard  to  reject  them  when  they  crave  to  have  the 
defects  of  their  former  supposed  Baptism  supplycd ;  but  this  I  think  fit  to 
be  done  in  ye  way  and  manner  you  wrote  of,  and  yl  upon  many  obvious  and 
weighty  considerations.  God  Almighty  direct  you,  give  us  all  fuller  and 
clearer  light,  and  establish  all  things  among  us  upon  ye  true  ancient  foun 
dations. 

I  am,  Sir, 
Your  affectionate  humble  Servant,  A.  E. 

Edr,  July  80,  1713.— To  the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Falconar,  to  ye  care 
of  Mr.  Alex.  Eose,  lodging  at  Mr.  Kaughtie's  house,  in  Edr. 


JOHN  FALCOXAH.  145 

XVIII. — Fm)ii  Mr.  G adder ar  to  Mr.  Falconar,  on  the  same  subject. 

R.  R.  S.,— I  was  glad  to  find  by  yours  of  the  14th  of  last  July  that  ye 
Letters  sent  you  from  hence  are  come  to  your  hand,  as  all  yours,  wch  are 
most  acceptable,  have  been  received  by  your  friends  here.  You  have  greatly 
rejoiced  me  by  the  most  agreeable  [report]  you  give  v*  our  dear  friends,  wt 
you,  ye  true  sons  of  the  Church,  do  strive  to  adorn  their  profession  w*  suitable 
conversations,  wdl  will  bring  great  comfort  to  those  that  are  over  them  in 
the  Lord,  and  admonish  them,  and  the  richest  blessings  to  themselves.  I 
pray  God  yt  they  may  be  filled  wl  ye  fruits  of  righteousness,  wch  are  by 
Jesus  Christ  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God.  Our  most  worthy  friend,  whose 
opinion  you  desired,  has  had  a  severe  fit  of  his  old  distemper,  and  was  so 
weak  and  low  in  his  spirits,  yt  I  delayed  the  giving  him  your  Letter  for  some 
time,  wch  made  me  delay  my  answers  so  long.  At  last  he  had  your  Letter, 
and  we  had  some  discourse  on  the  points  contained  therein.  His  resolutions 
are  as  follow : — To  the  first,  such  preparation  and  dispositions  as  are  neces 
sary,  as  are  proper  and  required  to  the  worthy  receiving  of  the  Lord's 
Supper.  To  the  2d,  he  is  of  the  Candidate's  opinion  as  to  immersion  ;  but 
seeing  we  have  no  ]}a)>tixti'ria  fit  for  the  immersion  of  adult  persons,  he 
thinks  the  immersion  of  ye  head  thrice,  being  the  principal  part  of  the  body, 
sufficient,  seeing  ye  Church  dispenses  w1  immersion  altogether  in  some  cases  , 
but  if  the  gentleman  chuses  ra^'r  immersion  of  ye  whole  body,  in  y1  case 
Fanonili'i  liiitc«  will  be  necessary,  and  a  meet  vessel,  in  a  convenient  apart 
ment,  fit  for  ye  Celebration.  0>'r  circumstances  must  be  left  to  ye  prudence 
of  the  administrator.  To  ye  3d,  Confirmation  cannot  come  too  soon  after  Bap 
tism,  and  he  is  satisfied  yt  Unction  is  very  ancient,  and  was  used  in  Confirma 
tion  in  ye  Primitive  Church.  And  since  you  tell  me  ye  have  none  of  ye  ancient 
Liturgies,  I  have  consulted  those  both  of  Greek  and  Latino  Churches,  par 
ticularly  as  to  Chrism  ;  how  ancient  they  are,  I  leave  to  such  as  are  conver 
sant  in  them  to  determine.  They  swelled  to  a  huge  bulk  many  ages  ago, 
and  the  Rites  and  Services  introduced  appear  to  me  in  their  whole  extent 
impracticable.  The  very  knowledge  of  ym  is  too  much  for  one  man.  Ars 
lo)i<i<i,  ritti  bred*.  The  luxuriancy  of  ye  Greeks,  particularly  in  their  Litnrt/ia 
Onliuuin,  is  surprising. 

I  have  Transcribed  the  inclosed  Sheet,  in  which  you  have  what  concerns 
Chrism,  wl  my  authority s,  and  likewise  what  Habcrtus  writes  as  to  the 
institution  of  it.  I  own  I  am  of  his  opinion  in  y1  point.  In  the  Preface  to 
the  Liturgie  of  ye  Cli.  of  E.,  there  is  a  short  Discourse  of  Ceremonies,  why 
some  are  abolished  and  some  retained,  wch  'tis  like,  you  may  think  worth 
your  reading.  But  this  is  not  to  disswade  you  from  gratifying  your  friend, 
who  is  known  to  be  a  gentleman  of  singular  worth,  and  who  knows  these 
matters  better  than  I  do.  Yet  I  must  own  my  jealousie  of  introducing 
Rites  and  Ceremonies  which  are  not  expressly  of  Divine  or  Apostolical 
institution ;  and  even  some  of  these  are  abolished,  and  others  gone  into 
desuetude.  The  Exteriour  of  Religion  is  undoubtedly  necessary,  for  we  are 

VOL.  II.  T 


HO  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

indispensibly  obliged  to  glorify  God  in  our  bodies,  and  when  the  Church  is 
pleased  to  appoint  what  is  for  Decency,  Order,  and  Edification,  I  am  not  to 
dispute,  but  to  obey.  But  the  disproportionate  increase  of  the  Extcriour 
had  for  many  ages  lost,  I  am  afraid,  the  very  Soul,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of  our 
most  Holy  Religion.  The  Cli.  of  Rome's  altering  the  Apostolical  Rite  of 
Imposition  of  Hands  in  Confirmation  into  that  of  Crossing  the  Forehead 
with  the  Thumb,  dipt  in  the  Chrism,  is  what  I  cannot  approve  of.  But  I 
shall  always  be  ready  to  submit  to  better  judgemts  and  better  information. 

I  acquainted  Mr.  Spinks  w*  this  matter,  and  I  reckon  he  will  write  to 
you.  Your  few  friends  here  truly  love  and  respect  you,  and  as  I  know  your 
sincere  affection  towards  them,  and  that  you  seem  afraid  of  the  imputa 
tion  of  flattery  while  you  express  your  genuine  sentiments  of  them,  the  way 
to  avoid  it  is  to  think  soberly  of  them,  as  you  certainly  do  of  yourself ;  to 
abstain  from  admiration,  and  not  to  write  their  good  qualities  or  perfections 
to  themselves,  for  good  men  will  be  afraid  to  hear  themselves  praised,  being 
cautioned  as  to  that,  John  v.  1-1,  and  Job  xxxii.  21,  22.  I  think  it  hardly 
worth  while  to  trouble  yourself  w1  Dr.  Clark;  his  design  seems  to  be  to  lessen 
our  B.  Saviour  as  to  his  Divinity  from  the  Scriptures  wcb  belong  to  his  office 
of  Mediatour,  wch  is  nothing  but  fallacy  and  imposing.  Winston  is  sunk 
into  such  contempt  w1  all  men  of  sense  and  learning,  that  he  is  not  capable 
of  doing  much  harm  here,  J>e»  </nttitix. 

Your  Bro>'r  is  very  well ;  his  friend  is  still  alive.  We  would  be  glad  to 
see  your  friend  here,  and  wish  you  could  perswade  him  to  add  to  his  good 
learning  a  more  extended  conversation  and  knowledge  of  the  world,  an 
advantage  to  a  candidate  e>'r  for  Ecclesiastical  or  Secular  employment.  Our 
friend  is  very  thankful  for  your  getting  off  some  copies  of  the  "  Thesaurus." 
I  have  put  up  the  0  in  a  box,  and  scut  them  aboard  a  ship  bound  for  Leith, 
to  the  care  of  my  friend  Mr.  Ch.  Littlejohn.  They  are  £3  a  copy  in  sheets. 
I  have  advanced' the  3d  part  of  the  price,  which  is  £0.  The  box,  porterage, 
and  other  small  charges  amount  to  (5*.  You  desire  your  Letters  to  be 
directed  to  my  Ld  of  Ed1',  and  I  take  it  for  granted  y*  you  will  not  be  dis 
pleased  that  I  have  left  them  open  to  be  perused  by  his  Lordship,  to  whose 
judgcm1  we  owe  great  deference,  upon  the  ace1  of  his  solidity,  as  well  as  yt  of 
his  station  and  experience.  "We  are  much  obliged  to  your  good  and  honour 
able  friend  the  La  Lyon,  who  is  sincere  and  hearty  to  promote  the  interest 
of  the  Church,  and  is  very  civil  and  obliging  to  me  in  particular.  I  shall 
add  no  more  to  this  tedious  Letter,  but  yt  I  ever  am  heartily  and  with 
respect  yours,  (Signed)  J.  G. 

London,  Aug.  11,  1713. 

Upon  the  foot  was  wrote  as  follows  : — 

Sir, — I  hope  you  had  my  Letter  by  the  Post,  by  wch  you  will  know  what 
has  hindered  this  so  long,  which  has  made  me  very  uneasy.  The  Dean  has 
not  recovered  his  health  so  as  to  be  able  to  apply  to  study,  so  y4  we  have  but 


JOHN  FALCOXAR.  147 

small  hopes  of  receiving  much  farther  benefit  by  his  excellent  pen.  Your 
son's  noble  patron  is  now  made  the  greatest  man  among  you.  I  pray  God 
make  him  a  happy  instrument  of  good  things  to  the  Church,  and  to  his 
Country.  The  Elections  go  on  apace  here,  and  are  very  strong  on  the 
Church's  side.  Our  friends  abroad  are  very  well,  God  be  praised.  My  most 
humble  service  to  my  Lord  Lion.  I  pray  God  for  an  increase  and  continu 
ance  of  your  health,  that  you  may  see  peace  upon  Israel,  and  a  righteous 
tho  oppressed  cause  flourish.  Adieu  ! 

Sept.  14,  1713. — For  the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Falconar,  at  Carnbec. 

XIX. — A  Letter  from  3/r.  Sjiinckcv  to  Jiixhop  Falconar  on  tJie  tame  subject,  Dated 

Awjust  17,  1713. 

Honored  Sir, — I  have  had  the  happiness  to  hear  sometimes  of  your 
welfare  by  Mr.  Campbell  and  Mr.  Gadderar,  at  which  I  much  rejoice,  and 
beseech  Almighty  God  to  grant  you  a  long  continuance  of  it,  for  His  Church 
and  Religion's  sake,  as  well  as  for  your  own.  As  to  your  case  proposed,  I 
cannot  think  my  judgm1  to  be  of  any  importance  after  that  Mr.  Gadderar 
has  given  you  my  worthy  neighbour's  and  his  own.  However,  to  shew  you 
how  ready  I  am  to  take  an  opportunity  of  serving  you  to  the  best  of  my 
ability,  I  shall  deliver  my  sense  of  it  in  few  words.  Our  Church,  it  is  plain, 
recommends  Immersion  in  Baptism,  where  it  may  be  wl  safety ;  and  I  could 
wish  it  oftener  practised  than  it  is,  in  conformity  to  primitive  Usage,  and 
the  tenor  and  design  of  S'  Paul's  Gth  chap,  to  the  Romans.  Tho  I  much 
question  whether  this  course  was  taken  in  the  Baptism  of  Cornelius  and  his 
Company  (Acts  x.  47) ;  and  tho  I  do  not  see  a  necessity  of  trine  either 
Immersion  or  Aspersion,  I  cannot  apprehend  any  hurt  in  it,  and  therefore 
see  not  why  it  should  be  refused.  It  is  certain  Chrysm  after  Baptism  was 
a  very  ancient  usage,  but  not  instituted  in  Scripture  ;  for  which  reason,  I 
take  Confirmation  by  laying  on  the  hand  and  Benediction,  to  be  as  complete 
as  by  Unction.  And  since  our  Church  directs  to  that  method,  I  should  not 
think  it  proper  to  use  Unction,  because  it  is  a  variation  from  my  Rule,  to 
which  I  think  I  ought  110  more  to  add  than. to  detract  from  it.  But  you  in 
Scotland,  being  not  under  the  same  obligation,  are  more  at  liberty  to  act  as 
you  shall  think  most  proper.  Nor  do  I  think,  if  you  use  Unction,  you  need 
concern  yourself  about  the  Composition  for  it,  since  we  have  no  certainty 
how  it  was  made  anciently,  nor  can  have  ;  but  any  sweet  oil  seems  to  me 
sufficient.  By  this  you  will  see  my  opinion  is  not  only  that  you  may  safely 
gratify  the  gentleman  in  his  request,  but  that  you  may  do  it  in  what  method 
you  like  best.  And  now,  I  take  it  for  granted,  I  need  not  advise  you  to 
secresy  in  it,  whereby  to  prevent  the  clamours  that  might  otherwise  be  raised 
by  cither  the  ignorant  or  malicious,  being  loth  to  be  farther  troublesome 
to  you ;  and  therefore  I  add  no  more,  but  that  I  am,  w1  great  sincerity,  Sir, 
Your  very  humble  and  faithful  Servant, 

(Signed)  N.  SPINCKKS. 


US  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

If  you  shall  see  or  have  occasion  to  send  to  my  good  Lord  Bishop  of 
Edr,  be  pleased  to  'give  him  my  humble  service  and  duty ;  and  I  hope  it  will 
not  be  long  ere  you  hear  again  from  me  by  his  Lordship. 

Directed  on  the  back — This  for  the  R.  K.  Mr.  Falconar. 


XX. — Another  Letter  from  J/r.  Spiiickes  to  J3i*}iop  Falconar,  Dated 
December  2,  1713. 

Reverend  and  Honored  Sir, — -I  am  very  sensible  of  the  favour  of  your 
kind  Letter,  which  I  received  by  good  Mr.  Campbell,  and  beg  your  accep 
tance  of  my  unfeigned  thanks  for  it.  The  great  respect  and  reverence  I 
justly  have  for  you,  makes  me  ivjoice  at  the  sight  of  your  hand  ;  and  your 
friendly  acceptance  of  my  poor  opinion  in  the  case  proposed,  is  still  a  farther 
instance  of  the  obligation  I  owe  to  you.  I  was  sensible  that  I  was  out  of 
my  sphere  in  pretending  to  give  my  advice  to  one  who  was  so  much  better 
able  to  advise  himself,  but  would  not  decline  offering  it  plainly  and  freely, 
tho  hastily  and  on  the  sudden,  that  you  might  see  how  ready  I  am  to  do  you 
any  service  in  my  power,  upon  whatever  occasion.  The  good  Dean  has  had 
more  freedom  from  the  severity  of  his  distemper,  for  diverse  months  past, 
than  could  well  be  expected.  He  has  now  got  a  cold,  which  oftentimes  has 
been  the  beginning  of  a  fit,  but  we  do  not  find  that  effect  of  it  yet ;  and  I 
pray  God  we  may  not,  in  which  I  know  you  will  heartily  join  w1  me.  I  hope 
you  have  received  before  this  Ten  Pounds  of  the  remainder  of  the  good  Lady 
Coventry's  Legacy,  which  I  know  my  good  Lord  Bishop  of  Edr  would  do  me 
the  honour  to  remit  to  you,  if  it  be  come  to  his  hands,  as  I  promise  myself 
it  is  before  this.  I  wish  I  could  have  made  it  a  much  larger  sum,  but  the 
account  would  not  allow  it,  by  reason  of  the  number  we  had  here  to  partake 
of  y*  money.  As  I  do  not  forget  to  pray  for  you,  so  I  heartily  thank  you  for 
the  share  I  have  in  your  prayers,  and  do  beg  the  continuance  of  them  for, 

Worthy  Sir, 
Your  most  humble  and  most  faithful  Servant, 

(Signed)  N.  SPINCKES. 

XX. — 3/V.  H<iy  of  Dalgetie's  C/iarctctcr  of  Jlishop  Falconai',  Transcribed  from 
the  "Postboy,"  Dated  Edinburgh,  July  25,  1723. 

On  Saturday,  the  Oth  instant,  Died  John  Falconar,  D.D.,  very  much 
lamented.  He  was  a  gentleman  well  born,  being  a  descendant  of  Lord 
Halkerton's  family.  He  apply'd  himself  from  his  youth  to  the  study  of 
Divinity.  He  was  made  Hector  of  Carnbee,  in  Fife,  and  there  Married  a 
daughter  of  Lord  Dunkeld,  by  whom  he  had  two  sons.  He  was  afterwards 
most  deservedly  promoted  to  a  higher  station  in  the  Church,  and  then  he 
was  obliged  to  exert  his  capacity,  which  he  did  with  much  wisdom  and 
pradence,  and  which,  from  his  innate  modesty,  he  had  till  then  endeavoured 
to  conceal,  except  when  his  duty  or  character  made  it  necessary.  He  was  a 


JOHN  FALCONAE.  li'J 

gentleman  endowed  w1  great  meekness,  moderation,  and  charity,  w4  exem 
plary  piety  and  great  humility.  He  was  a  man  of  good  natural  parts,  and 
great  learning.  He  always  apply  ed  himself  more  particularly  and  closely  to 
the  study  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  the  Writings  of  the^early  Fathers,  in 
hoth  which  he  was  a  great  proficient.  From  these  he  formed  his  principles, 
and  his  life  and  practice  were  as  primitively  Catholick  as  was  his  doctrine  ; 
and  110  outward  difficulties  did  ever  move  him  out  of  this  road.  He  was 
calm,  serene,  and  uniform  under  the  many  pressures  of  very  narrow  circum 
stances,  having  no  fortune  to  sustain  him  for  many  years  before  his  demise, 
but  what  Divine  Providence  kindly  afforded  him  from  day  to  day ;  and, 
indeed,  he  needed  the  less,  because  he  only  desired  and  was  content  with  a 
little.  He  much  lamented  the  disputes  in  Religion  and  the  divisions  of 
Christendom,  both  at  home  and  abroad;  and  the  great  decay  of  Primitive 
Doctrine,  Worship,  Discipline,  Government,  and  Practice,  and  he  laid  the 
melancholy  situation  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  very  much  to  heart.  In 
short,  he  was  a  man  of  a  truly  Catholick  spirit,  much  beloved  and  respected 
by  all  who  knew  and  had  a  relish  of  his  virtue  and  piety. 

Number  4  in  JJixlmp  .Forks'  Catalogue  in  the  l^piscopal  Cnllnct. 

2.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Falconar  to  Bishops  Campbell  and  Gaddcrar, 
May  3,  1720,  informing  them  about  what  had  pass'd  in  Edin1'  after  the  Death 
of  Bishop  Hose,  viz.,  fixing  a  Bishop  in  Edin1',  and  Bishops  in  other  places, 
not   pretending  to  fill  Dioceses,  but  appropriating  some  to  Districts,  and 
these  in  the  way  of  comendam ;  that  the  Aiite-Ke volution  Presbyters  had 
contended  for  excluding  the  Post-Revolution  ones  from  any  faculty  of  caus 
ing  Bishops,  but  it  was  carried  against  them;  and  yl  Mr.  Fullarton  had  been 
fixed  in  Edinr;  only  they  did  not  think  it  prudent  he  should  succeed  the  late 
Bishop  of  Edin1'  in  his  Vicarious  Metropolitical  powers,  but  that  lie  should 
Convocate  and  Preside. 

3.  (Holograph)   Bishop  Collier  to  Bishop  Falconar,  May  30th,  1720, 
obviating  a  clamour  raised  by  old  friends  ag1  the  Usagcrs  of  having  been  the 
occasion  of  carrying  numbers  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  into  ye  Revolution, 
and  to  Atheism  itself,  and  of  their  being  Schismaticks  ;  which  last  comes 
w1  a  very  ill  grace  from  those  who  admitt  some  whom  they  know  to  be 
Members  of  the  complying  Church,  and  that  two  of  their  chiefs  defend  this 
latitude. 

4.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Spinckes  to  Bishop  Falcouar,  Augt.  ID,  1720, 
wherein  of  the  motion  that  only  old  Presbyters  (i.e.,  Ante-Revolution  ones) 
should  have  the  priviledge  of  Voting,  &c.,  and  yl  Scotland  is  not  tied  down 
to  any  settled  Form  of  Liturgy  since  the  Reformation. 

5.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Falconar  to  Bishops  Campbell  and  Gadderar, 
Febry.  3,  1721-2,  wherein  that  he  himself  [B.  F.]  had  Administrated  with 
ye  Mixture  and  by  the  Scotch  Prayer  Book  many  years  backward,  long  ere 
any  dispute  commenced  at  London ;  that  he  had  apprised  the  late  Bishop  of 


150  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Edinr  of  his  Avay  of  doing,  against  which  no  remonstrance  was  made  ;  that 
ye  other  Bishops  of  Scotland  approved  and  used  the  Invocation  according  to 
ye  example  of  the  late  Bishop  Hose,  and  that  was  an  Innovation  w1  respect 
to  ve  English  Liturgy  ;  that  there  were  different  Liturgies  of  old,  and  before 
the*  Reformation,  and  all  this  without  any  injury  to  Unity  ;  that  some  in 
Scotland  were  ohlidged  to  be  tolerated  without  any  Liturgy,  &c. ;  and  why, 
then,  all  the  noise  about  an  exact  uniformity  ?  being  a  thing  hardly  prac 
ticable,  &c. 

6.  (Original)  Geo.  Putullo  to  Bishop  Falconar,  Riga,  Octor.  20,  1722, 
concerning  the  Administration  of  the  Holy  Eucharist  by  the  Lutherans  and 
the  Prussians. 

7.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Falconar  to  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  December  2G, 
1722,  importing  occasionally  to  Communicate  with  those  that  did  not  use 
the  Mixture,  which  and  the  other  Usages  he  had  practised,  "  and  that  (says 
he)  some  years  before  the  commencement  of  the  dispute  in  England;"  and 
for  this  his  practice  he  assigns  a  weighty  reason. 

8.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Falconar,  March  G,  1723.     The  address  lost, 
but  it  would  appear  to  have  been  to  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  wherein  the  Doctrine 
and  Practice  of  the  Universal  Primitive  Church  must  be  had  recourse  to,  as 
subsidiary  to  the  Scriptures,  to  determine  all  the  Essentials  of  Religion  ; 
that  the  opposites  do  ill  in  grounding  their  opposition  to  the  Usages  on  then- 
being  obsolete  and  a>itii/i«it<<il,  seeing  this  will  stand  in  bar  to  all  reformation 
of  Principles  and  Practices,  &c. ;  that  Episcopacy  in  Scotland  before  the 
Revolution  was  founded  on  no  other  foot  than  that  of  the  King's  Supremacy, 
&c. ;  with  a  most  hearty  wish  that  the  Primitive  Penitentiary  Discipline  were 
revived,  &c. 

9.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Falconar,  Aprile  9,  1723 ;  the  address  lost,  but 
it  would  appear  to  have  been  to  Bishop  Collier.     Herein  yl  Usagers  and 
Non-Usagers  should  impose  nothing  as  to  these  disputed  points  upon  Clergy 
and  Laies  by  authority,  but  y*  the  one  side  should  Communicate  with  the 
other  occasionally,  &c.     "  These  English  Bishops  (says  he)  who  innovated 
on  the  first  Reformed  Liturgy,  brought  not  their  people  to  the  Truth,  but 
went  over  to  the  people  and  the  Prince,  and  so  is  come  of  it."     He  also  gives 
a  plan  of  Discipline  which  he  intended. 

14.  (Holograph,  Original)  Bishop  Gadderar  to  Bishop  Falconar,  Augt. 
14,  1713,  concerning  Immersion  in  Baptism  and  Chrism  in  Confirmation, 
with  Bishop  Collier's  opinion  of  them.  A  gentleman  mentioned  to  be  grati 
fied  in  his  request ;  that  Mr.  Spinckes  was  to  write  to  Bishop  Falconar  upon 
this  matter.  A  sheet  of  Arguments  for  the  Chrism,  out  of  the  Eucliologium 
Gnecorum,  and  Habertus's  opinion ;  as  also  placed  in  the  same  Letter,  a 
Consecration  Prayer  for  the  Chrism,  in  the  handwriting  of  Bishop  Falconar, 
and  a  Form  of  Prayer,  in  said  handwriting,  at  the  Laying  on  of  Hands, 
Anointing,  and  Crossing  in  Confirmation.  N.B. — This  same  Letter  and  the 
Sheet  of  Arguments  came  open  and  under  cover  to  my  Lord  of  Edinr,  for 
his  Lordship's  perusal  and  judgment. 


JOHN  FALCONAR.  151 

Number  5  in  the  tnunc  Cataloyue. 

9.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Falconar  to  Bishop  Miller,  Decemr.  28,  1714, 
wherein  "that  the  Governours  of  the  Church,  with  the  Counsel  of  the  Pres 
byters,  have  a  Faculty  to  fix  the  Publick  Worship." 

10.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  Augt.  10,  1720,  wherein  y*  any  Form  of 
receiving  Penitents   from  the   Established  Church  of  England,  should,  in 
point  of  prudence,  be  in  very  general  terms. 

11.  (Original)  Do.  to  Do.,  June  20, 1721,  complaining  of  those  Preachers 
who  set  the  Observance  of  Christian  Institutions  over  against  Holiness  of 
Life,  whereas  they  arc  like  the  twins  in  ye  Story,  who  live  and  die  together, 
&c.  ;  and  that  the  Church,  when  under  a  destitution  of  secular  protection 
and  encouragemt,  whether  voluntary  or  involuntary,  should  betake  herself 
to  her  own  intrinsic  power. 


BISHOP   FALCONAR' S   VIEW   OF   RELIGION. 

/  Jii-J'crrcii  to  In  jiinjc  40.  j 

RELIGION  is  that  duty  which  man  oweth  to  God,  and  it  is  expressed  by  Faith, 
"Worship,  and  Obedience.  To  the  right  discharge  of  this  duty  He  hath  pro 
mised  rewards,  and  threatned  punishment  against  such  as  either  neglect  it 
or  do  it  amiss  imperfectly.  The  reward  He  hath  promised  is  man's  true 
happieness ;  and  therefor  He  is  graciously  pleased  to  call  that  His  service 
which  is  man's  felicity,  and  never  forbids  us  the  pursuit  of  a  re  all  but  of  a 
false  and  mistaken  happieness. 

That  this  duty  of  Religion  is  oweing  to  God,  will  be  readily  owned  by 
all,  save  those  who  are  formaly  Atheists,  or  who  are  such  upon  the  matter. 
These  are  the  men  who,  in  favour  of  their  vices,  debauch  their  reason  so 
much  as  to  state  it  advocat  against  Religion,  it  and  their  indulged  appetites 
and  bents  being  quite  inconsistent. 

But  such  who  own  Religion,  must  also  own  that  He  hath  an  indis 
putable  right  to  prescribe  and  fix  Religion  to  men.  Was  it  left  to  man's 
caprice  or  reason  to  form  to  himself  that  by  which  he  should  procure,  not 
only  a  temporal  life  and  happiness,  but  an  eternall '?  This  would  prove  his 
independencie  upon  God,  both  as  to  his  being  and  weill-being,  than  which 
there  is  nothing  more  absurd  and  blasphemous. 

This  being  granted,  that  God  hath  an  unquestionable  right  to  determine 
Religion,  it  will  follow  that,  as  He  in  greatest  equity  may  prescribe  to  an 
innocent  the  measures  and  conditions  of  his  happiness,  under  the  threat- 
nings  of  punishments  and  promise  of  rewards,  so  much  more  may  He  doe  so 
to  an  offending  creature.  It  will  also  follow  that  no  Religion,  save  what  He 
Himself  enjoyns  and  condescends  on,  can  be  acceptable  to  Him,  can  plead 
any  title  to  His  promises  of  reward,  or  exemption  from  punishment. 

This  being  granted,  the  next  enquiry  must  be,  where  God  hath  made 
this  discovery  of  His  will,  which  so  tenderly  affected  to  His  honour  and  the 


152       REASON,  ENTHUSIASM,  AND  DIVINE  REVELATION. 

creature's  happiness  ;    and  there  are  three  things  which  compeat  for  it,— 
Reason,  Enthusiasm,  and  the  Revelation  contained  in  the  Scriptures. 

'it  cannot  be  founded  on  Reason,  as  it  stands  single  and  unasisted  by 
Divine  Revelation.      Because  Reason,  however,  the  Candle  of  the  Lord  (as 
the  wise  man  terms  it),  gives  us  but  a  very  obscure  idea  both  of  God  and  of 
our  own  nature,  of  happiness  and  misery,  of  our  present  state  and  future 
life  as  is  evident  from  the  Wryteings  of  the  ancient  Philosophers.     The  best 
of  them   Pythagoras  and  Plato,  founded  on  the  Revelations  made  to  Moses, 
and    expressly    declare    that    God    cannot    be    Worshipped    and    Served 
acceptably,  unless  lie  should  declare  Himself  on  the  subject.     It's  plain  that 
Reason  is  a  vci-y  limittcd  thing,  in  so  much  that  it  is  forced  to  subnutt 
itselfe  to  the  very  secrets  of  nature;  yea,  and  finds  inextricable  difficulties 
even  in  Mathematicks,  that  Science  in  which  it  thinks  to  find  the  most 
certainty.     Moreover,  it  is  quite  debauched  with  respect  to  the  generalihc  in 
favour  of  earthly  and  carnall  passions,  so  that  it  docs  violence  to  its  own 
clearest  convictions.      Thus  the  Sccpticks,  yea  and  Mr.  Hobs,  impugnc  the 
certainty   even   of  Geomctricall    demonstrations.      But    th<">    we    suppose 
Reason  a  sure  guide  for  innocent  man,  yet  it  cannot  be  such  for  offending 
man.      To  know  how  to  attone  an  offended  God,  and  recover  His  favour,  is 
utterly  impossible,  unless  He  declare  Himself  upon  the  subject.      All  that 
Reason  can  possibly   suggest  on  the  head,  is  Repentance;  and  how  is  it 
possible  to  know  if  this  will  be  accepted?      Repentance  revokes  the  affront, 
but  cannot  recall  the  act;  and  at  utmost  it  is  optionall  to  God,  the  Supreme 
Governour,  to  accept  it  or  not ;  so  that  the  guilty  party  is  still  left  at  a 
doubtfull  uncertaintie,  and  so  without  any  solid  ground  of  hope  or  comfort. 
Moreover,  if  Repentance  were  enough,  even  the  terms  of  it  behoved  to  be 
specified  by  God  himselfe,  otherwise  it  is  not  possible  to  know  if  the  com 
mitted  'MI  i'lt  shall  be  actually  pardoned  by  the  Supreme,  and  the  delinquent 
restored  to  favour  and  the  bcncfitc  of  the  Law.     From  all  which  it  is  plain, 
that    offending   man  cannot   know  by  mcir  Reason,  unassisted  by   Divine 
Revelation,  what  that  Religion  is  which  is  acceptable  to  God,  and  which 
gives  a  title  to  His  rewards;  in  which  rewards  the  true  felicity  of  man  doth 
consist. 

God,  in  revealing  truths  to  men,  which  are  necessary,  important,  and 
uscfull,  yet  which  he  could  not  have  known  without  His  own  interposition, 
graciously  condescends  to  attest  them  by  such  supernatural  acts,  as  not  only 
surpass  our  power,  but  indeed  that  of  all  created  agents.  These,  His  super- 
naturall  acts,  arc  of  two  kinds.  First,  Trespasses  (may  I  he  allowed  so  to 
term  it)  on  the  method  He  hath  established  in  acting  on  His  creatures,  as 
stopping  the  course  of  the  sun,  or  preternaturall  eclipse,  dividing  the  sea, 
multiplying  parts  of  matter,  or  rather  creating  new  matter,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  Widow's  cruise  of  oylc,  the  feeding  thousands  with  a  little  bread  and  a 
few  fishes,  especially  raiseing  from  the  dead,  and  our  Lord's  raiseing  of 
Himselfe.  When  all  these  things  are  done  in  the  face  of  the  sun,  before 
multitudes,  confessed  by  enemies,  devils,  and  adversarie  men,  for  pious  and 
vertuoiis  ends,  to  the  benefite  spirituall  and  temporall  of  mankind,  and 
leave  a  permanent  effect ;  when  again,  in  all  competitions  of  preternaturall 
actings  between  God  and  evill  spirits,  the  superiority  falls  to  those  who  are 
commissioned  by  God,  and  the  emissaries  of  the  Devil  are  vanquished,  as  in 
the  case  of  Moses  and  the  Egyptian  Magicians,  Jannes  and  Jambres, 
Elijah  and  the  Priests  of  Baal,  St.  Peter  and  Simon  Magus,  St.  Paul  and 
Elvmas  the  Sorcerer,  our  Lord  in  ejecting  confessed  Devils,  and  the 


VARIOUS  GLOSSES  PUT  ON  SCRIPTURE.  153 

primitive  Christians  in  their  Exorcism,  silencing  the  Heathen  Oracles,  and 
in  their  contests  with  the  deluding  spirits  of  Hereticks  and  Heathens. 

The  other  part  of  supernatural  acts  is  the  knowledge  of  future  contin 
gent  events,  which  depend  on  the  various  determination  of  the  free  will  of 
man,  which  cannot  possibly  be  knowen  by  any  creature,  save  by  those  to 
whom  God  is  pleased  to  reveal  them.  And  when  these  Prophecies  are 
publicly  declared,  when  submitted  to  the  judgement  of  these  who  had  the 
gift  of  'discerning  spirits,  when  these  are  attested  by  supernatural  signs  at 
the  time  when  the  Prophecie  is  uttered,  confirmed  by  the  accomplishment 
of  the  events,  and  when  the  Prophets  are  at  unity  amongst  themselves,  when 
any  one  or  more  truths  come  thus  attested — then  it  hath  the  seal  of  Heaven 
stamped  on  it ;  and  to  deny  or  reject  it,  because  it  transcends  the  compre 
hension  of  our  reason,  which  is  baftled  by  a  great  many  things  in  nature,  is 
the  sin  ag*  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  difficultly  pardoned. 

From  all  this,  these  propositions  are  evident :  1.  That  the  Religion  which 
is  acceptable  to  God,  and  rewarded  by  Him,  must  be  revealed  by  Himselfe. 
2.  That  the  Divine  truths  contained  in  the  Scriptures,  evidently  bearing  the 
Divine  attestation,  the  Religion  prescribed  in  it  must  be  the  true  one.  Yet 
here  another  most  material  difficulty  remains,  and  that  is,  ancnt  the  sense 
and  meaning  of  many  propositions  in  the  Scriptures,  and  these,  too,  of 
chiefest  importance.  *  Whoever  shall  impartially  consider  the  deplorable 
debates  which  now  are  011  foot  in  Christendom,  and  the  divisions  and  sub 
divisions  that  are  among  those  who  glory  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  will 
find  that  some  men  erect  new  schemes,  and  force  the  Scriptures  to  favour 
their  inventions.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Church  of  Pome  either  clap  glosses 
on  the  Scripture,  to  fortific  their  innovations  and  inforcc  them  with  their 
pretended  infallibility,  or  they  indeed  pretend  new  Revelations,  and  charge 
them  on  the  belief  of  men  by  pretended  miracles.  For  my  own  part,  the 
variety  of  glosses  delivered  by  the  various  litigant  parties  hath  raised  in  me 
great  perturbation  of  mind  ;  and  this  it  must  needs  occasion  to  any  one  who 
desires  to  please  God.  and  to  perswadc  others  so  to  doe.  That  I  may  be 
directed  aright  in  this  important  matter,  I  have  considered  that  there  are- 
First,  some"  Divine  verities  so  plain  that  they  must  be  believed  unless  we 
will  doe  violence  to  our  own  minds,  such  as  these  :  that  there  is  a  First 
Cause  from  which  all  other  things  derive  their  existence,  and  by  whose 
influence  they  are  preserved  and  governed  ;  that  this  First  Cause  is  infinitely 
perfeit,  that  He  can  never  deceive  or  be  deceived.  These  theological  verities 
may  be  decerned  by  attentive  and  unprejudiced  minds,  antecedently  to 
Revelation  ;  and  indeed  Revelation  suppos'cth  them,  altho  they  are  illus 
trated,  and  more  strongly  operate  on  the  mind  in  order  to  practice  when 
Revelation  seconds  Reason.  A  common  artisan,  without  the  help  of  mathe- 
maticks,  does  his  work ;  but  when  instructed  in  the  rules  and  principles  of 
mechanism,  sees  more  perfectly  into  his  act,  and  does  his  work  more 
accurately  and  exactly.  Tims  Reason  may  lead  into  the  knowledge  of  the 
existence  of  God,  to  the  knowledge  of  Hi's  infinitly  perfeit  attributes ;  biit 
then  he  discerns  these  and  the  like  theologicall  verities  more  clearly,  and  is 
more  strongly  impressed  by  them,  in  order  to  faith  and  practice,  when  God 
is  pleased  to  'back  this  discovery  which  Reason  makes  by  His  authoritative 
Revelation.  This  is  manifest  from  the  far  more  bright  notices  of  God  which 
these  men  in  all  ages  have  had  whose  Reason  hath  bein  assisted  by  Revela 
tion,  than  those  men  who  in  this  kind  of  knowledge  have  been  destitute  of 
this  great  assistance.  Thus,  then,  to  understand  the  Scriptures,  the  great 


VOL.   II. 


154  SCRIPTURAL  MATTERS  OF  FACT. 

theological  verities  to  which  the  mind  must  necessarly  assent  (unless  it  will 
do  violence  to  itselfc  by  wilfull  stilling  its  own  convictions),  must  be  settled 
on  as  so  many  lirst  principles,  but  so  as  they  are  delivered  in  the  Holy 
Scripture.  The  Reason  of  a  young  child  soon  convinccth  him  of  that  first 
principle,  that  he  ought  to  obey  his  parents  ;  but  when  this  is  set  in  a  full 
light,  and  authoritatively  enjoyiied  by  the  parents,  it  becomes  more  strongly 
binding  on  his  belief  and  practice. 

^  The  next  tiling  considerable  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  matters  of 
fact,  such  as  the  Creation,  the  Fall  of  our  first  parents,  the  universal  Deluge, 
&c.  Now,  Reason  may  fairly  induce  us  to  conclude  that  all  these  facts  are 
infallibly  true,  if  it  be  considered  that  men  in  these  dayes  lived  long,  and  so 
were  near  tbese  facts;  that  they  were  exceeding  carcfull,  through  the 
strongest  obligation  of  interest,  to  transmitt  them  to  postcritie,  before  the 
invention  of  letters;  that  God  in  those  early  ages  made  very  frequently 
extraordinary  communications  of  His  will  to  man,  and  by  these  communica 
tions  charged  the  heads  of  families,  under  the  highest  pains,  to  traduce  these 
important" truths  to  posteritie.  Thus  Moses  could  not,  after  an  ordinary 
way,  but  kno\v  perfectly  these  great  facts  delivered  in  the  Book  of  Genesis. 
But,  then,  that  God  Who  cloathed  him  with  his  commission  and  attested  it 
by  a  miracle,  and  by  a  faculty  in  the  name  of  (rod  to  work  miracles,  did 
certainly  direct  him  so  in  wryteing  that  History,  upon  which  the  whole  stress 
of  his  commission  depended,  that  as  he  durst  not  falsific  so  he  could  not 
possibly  lie  deceived.  The  knowledge  of  these  facts  was  of  absolute  neces 
sity  to  that  peculiar  people  to  whom  he  was  sent,  in  order  to  the  purposes 
wliich  God  designed  on  them;  yea,  to  all  other  men,  who  from  thcncefore- 
ward  were  so  to  serve  God  as  to  be  accepted  and  rewarded  by  Him.  Where  - 
for,  to  understand  the  very  great  importance  of  these  facts,  before  and  long 
after  the  times  of  Moses,  and  Avhich  are  left  on  record  by  subsequent  inspired 
penmen,  it  is  of  vast  use  to  know  the  received  notions  and  confessed  prin 
ciples  of  these  times  in  which  the  facts  were  acted ;  and  I  doubt  nothing 
but  ignorance  of  this  notion  hath  led  many  interpreters  of  Scripture  into 
gross  mistakes  and  errors. 

Nothing  more  common  in  the  early  ages  of  the  world  than  God's 
extraordinary  communications  of  His  will  to  men  ;  His  immediat,  His 
visible,  and  remarkable  punishments  of  particular  offences;  His  as  remark 
able,  immediat,  and  visible  rewards  and  deliverances  of  the  Righteous. 
This  with  respect  to  particular  persons,  but  chiefly  societies.  The  most 
ancient  profane  Histories  arc  full  of  these;  yea,  the  Mythology,  i.e.,  the 
fictitious  Histories  of  the  Ancients  (which,  by  the  way,  are  founded  on  true 
facts,  thu  abused  by  Poetick  licentiousness),  is  full  of  these  also.  Immediate 
Divine  designations  to  dominion,  or  to  the  execution  of  Divine  sentences 
past  against  persons  or  societies,  was  ordinary  in  these  times  ;  and  the 
ignorance  of  this  thing  hath  led  many  into  error,  yea  and  pernicious  prac 
tices.  The  presidencie  of  angels  (in  Scripture  called  gods)  was  believed  in 
these  early  times  ;  that  of  the  Supreme  Being,  after  an  immediate  and  direct 
manner,  was  reckoned  the  highest  privilege ;  consulting  the  oracles  of  the 
true  God,  and  of  false  gods,  was  very  ordinary  and  received  answers  from 
them,  especially  in  arduous  cases.  These  and  some  other  acknowledged 
notions  and  practices  are  to  be  knowen,  in  order  to  a  just  view  of  facts 
recorded  in  the  Old  Testament ;  and  interpreters,  by  not  attending  to  such 
principles,  or  ignorance  of  them,  run  upon  mistakes. 

3.  In  the  Scriptures  there  are  Morall  Precepts — by  which  I  understand 


THE  WAY  TO  KNOW  THE  MEANING  OF  HOLY  WRIT.     155 

all  these  duties  pcrformablo  by  free  agents  (such  as  augells  and  men)  to  God, 
to  other  men,  and  themselves.  Now,  Reason,  instructed  in  the  common 
principles  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  in  those  of  prime  equity  and  pru 
dence,  may  and  doth  discover  many  of  these  duties  ;  but  the  interior  motives 
to  these  duties,  and  the  extent  of  them,  is  purely  owing  to  Revelation,  as 
shall  be  showcn  hereafter  in  its  proper  place. 

4.  In  the  Scriptures  there  are  the  Secrets  of  Heaven,  which  Reason 
possibly  could  not  have  discovered  without  God's  interposition  by  Revelation ; 
such  as  the  apostacic  of  our  first  parents,  the  miserable  state  of  man  whyle 
in  this  state  of  enmitie  with  God,  and  chiefly  the  Redemption  through  Jesus 
Christ,  with  all  the  other  mysterious  verities  which  appertain  to  that  super- 
naturall  Dispensation.  To  this  we  must  add  the  Ordinances  and  Sacraments 
which  God  hath  instituted  as  necessary  appendages  to  this  Dispensation. 
To  understand  which  aright  is  the  principall  concern  of  a  Christian,  and  in 
order  to  this  two  things  are  necessary. 

1st.  To  know  the  Maxims  that  then  were  generally  received  among  the 
Jewcs  ;  such  Jewes  as  lived  in  the  Land  of  Canaan,  and  such  of  the  Natives 
and  Proselytes  as  were  dispersed  among  the  other  nations  of  the  1  Ionian 
Empire,  and  which  in  the  New  Testament  are  called  Greeks  and  Hellenists; 
for  on  due  attention  it  will  be  found  that  the  Spirit  of  God  alludes  to  these 
their  principles,  and  useth  their  terms  of  art ;  it  is  very  reasonable  to  think 
so,  seeing  the  Holy  Ghost  was  to  deliver  Himselfe  to  them  in  a  way  which 
they  were  to  understand,  and  these  great  Mysteries  could  not,  after  an  ordi 
nary  way,  been  otherwise  understood  by  them. 

2.  The  other  way  to  come  at  the  meaning  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
Revelations  of  the  New  Testament,  is  to  know  that  sense  in  which  the  first 
Christians  understood  them,  and  this  of  all  others  is  the  surest  way  of 
understanding  the  mind  of  God  revealed  in  the  Gospel ;  for  it  is  plain  that 
the  good  Spirit  of  God  delivered  Himself  to  them  so  as  that  they  should 
understand  Him.  To  think  otherwise  is  manifest  blasphemie.  The 
miraculous  gifts  bestowed  on  these  primitive  Christians,  and  which  con 
tinued  with  the  Church  for  800  years,  is  a  plain  proof  that  what  they 
believed,  professed,  and  practised  Avas  really  the  Truth  revealed  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  it  being  impossible  Ho  would  attest  error  or  confirm  lies  by  supcr- 
naturall  acts.  They  were  quit  disinterested,  and  sought  nothing  else  than 
to  approve  themselves  to  God.  They  despised  the  pleasures  of  sense,  and 
the  pomp  and  riches  of  this  world,  and  aspired  after  nothing  but  Heaven. 
They  exposed  themselves  to  all  these  evils  the  malice  of  devils  or  bad  men 
could  invent  or  inflict,  ere  they  would  forgoc  one  jot  or  title  of  that  Divine 
Revelation.  These  heavenly  verities  were  intrusted  by  God  to  them,  to  be 
handed  down  as  ane  inestimable  inheritance  to  their  successors.  They  knew 
the  danger  of  being  false  to  their  trust,  and  the  great  reward  of  their  faith- 
fullness.  They  knew  that  if  they  or  ane  Angel  from  Heaven  should  Preach 
any  other  Gospel  than  what  was  once  delivered  to  the  Saints,  they  were  to 
be  accursed. 

Thus,  then,  that  sense  of  the  Scriptures  which  the  Primitive  Church 
believed,  professed,  and  practised  universally,  in  all  places  and  at  all  times, 
is  indeed  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  should  be  the  judge  of  contro- 
versie,  and  the  last  resort  of  all  debate,  and  is  infinitely  preferable  to  the 
conceits  and  glosses  of  men,  how  witty  and  ingenious  soever,  who  live  or 
have  lived  at  a  great  distance  from  the  fountain.  Let  Papist,  Calviuist, 
Lutherian,  Arminian,  Socinian,  Quaker,  Anabaptist,  &c.,  advance  with  what 


150  THE  F1KST  MAX. 

air  of  probabilitic  or  reasonableness  whatever,  any  Doctrine  that's  contrary 
or  disagreeable  to  this,  it  is  none  of  the  Divine  Faith  once  delivered  to  the 
Saints,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  regarded. 

Of  the  Firxt  Man. 

I'liilosophers  who  of  old  have  discoursed  on  the  Originall  and  Nature  of 
Man,  have  disaggrccd  and  blundered  oddly  ancnt  his  nature  and  origination; 
and  no  wonder,  since  lieason  without  the  help  of  lie-vela t ion  can  do  nothing 
to  purpose  this  way.  Philosophers  who  have  lived  since  the  promulgation 
and  reception  of  the  Gospel,  yet  who  trusted  more  to  their  own  conceits  than 
to  Uevrlation,  have  in  nothing  been  more  unhappy  than  in  their  enquiries  on 
this  important  subjuct.  It  is  therefore  just  and  necessary  we  should  take 
in  with  what  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  Scripture  hath  told  us  on  this  weighty 
head. 

We  are  told,  Gen.  ii.  7,  that  God  formed  man  out  of  the   dust,  and 
breathed  into  his  nosefhirls  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  became  a  living  soul. 
And  Gen.  i.  27,  so  God  created  man  in  His  own  Image,  in  the  Image  of  God 
created  He  him.     On  this  subject  we  may  observe — 1st.   That  the  animals 
were  by  God's  order  the  product  of 'the  earth,  Gen.  i.  '21  ;  whereas,  Gen.  ii. 
7,  God  is  said  to  have  formed  man  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth.      Whence  it 
follows  that  man  hath  a  distinguishing  excellency  and  sanctity  stamped  on 
his  nature,  as  being  the  immediate  production  of  God  himself.     2dly.   That 
man,  which  was  funned  by  God  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  was  a  compleat 
animal,  and  had,  as  such,  no  other  life  than  that  of  brutes,  which  obleidged 
him  to  return  to  the  dust  whence  he  came,  Gen.  iii.  1',).     Thus  in  the  first 
instance,  man  is  none  other  than  a  compleat  animal,  tho  of  a  more  exquisite 
composition  than  any  other  animals  ;  and  this  is  what  in  the  New  Testament 
is  so  fivqiiently  called  the  "natural  man,''  and  which  indeed  should  have 
been  termed  by  our  Translators  the  "  animal  man,"  this  last  being  more 
expressive  of  the  Original,     odly.  God  is  said  to  breathe  into  him  the  breath 
of  life.     This  is  the  rational  soul.     The  Septuagint,  or  Greek  Old  Testament, 
which  is  followed  by  the  New  Testament,  plainly  calls  him  a  man  ere  this 
breath  is  breathed  into  him,  whence  it  is  clear  that  this  breath  is  a  thing 
quite  distinct  from  his  animal  life,  a  soul  far  superior  to  that  animal  soul 
which  he  had  before  this  breathing.     This  rational  soul  is  that  which  dis- 
tinguisheth  him  from  and  exalteth  him  above  the  beast.     It  qualifies  him 
for  immortality.     "  Who  knoweth  the  spirit  of  man  that  goeth  upward  and 
the  spirit  of  tlie  beast  that  gocth  downward"  (Eccl.  iii.  21).     This  rational 
soul,  distinct  and  superior  to  the  animal,  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord,  as  the 
wise  man  calls  it  (Prov.  xx.  27).     It  is  that  whereby  we  arc  capacitated  for 
understanding  moral  and  spirituall  propositions  ;   that  principle  on  which 
the  Infinite  Word  or  Wisdom  shines,  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh 
into  the  world  (Jo.  i.  9).     Ithly.  Besydes  this,  the  first  man  is  said  to  have 
bein  made  after  the  Image  of  God ;  that  is,  the  Divine  Spirit  Avas  communi 
cated  to  him.     This  is  the  Divine  Nature  which  is  restored  to  Christians  by 
Jesus  Christ  (2  Peter  i.  4) ;  that  spirit  which  is  distinct  from  the  soul  and 
the  body  (1  Thcss.  v.  23) ;   the  quickening  spirit  (1  Cor.  xv.  45) ;  and  the 
second  Adam  (47).     Thus  the  first  man  was,  in  the  first  instance,  created  a 
compleat  living  animal,  on  which  God  superinduced  the  rational  soul  or 
mind ;    and  then,   on  that  higher  principle,   he  further  superinduced  the 
Divine  Spirit. 


OUR  FIRST  PARENTS  WHILE  INNOCENT.  157 

It  is  plain  from  what  is  said,  that  man  was  compounded  of  parts  hetero 
geneous — that  is,  of  diverse  or  contrary  kinds  ;  and  hence,  with  inclinations 
to  things  of  a  material  or  earthly,  and  to  things  of  a  moral  or  spiritual 
nature  ;  whence  we  may  come  to  have  a  right  notion  of  the  free  will  or 
liberty  of  man ;  of  that  power,  which  by  inward  consciousness  we  feel,  to 
chuse  or  refuse — our  animal  part  one  way,  the  rational  and  spiritual  another. 
The  right  choice  constitutes  virtue,  the  wrong  vice.  Besydes  this,  God 
implanted  in  iruui  ane  invincible  inclination  to  happicncss,  and  anc  equal 
aversion  to  miscrie.  This  rendered  him  a  proper  subject  of  the  Divine 
government,  seeing  his  happiencss  or  miscrie  depended  upon  God,  and 
without  this  he  could  not  be  capable  of  reward  or  punishment,  and  would 
have  bcin  indifferent  as  to  vice  or  virtue,  obedience  or  disobedience. 


The  first  man  and  woman  being  made,  as  is  said,  God  joyncd  them 
togithcr  by  Manage,  and  thus  Sanctified  their  posteritie,  and  then  com 
municated  His  will  to  them,  after  a  direct  and  immediat  manner.  lie,  as 
is  said,  haveing  made  them  of  heterogeneous  parts,  and  made  it  optional  to 
them  to  gratilie  the  one  or  the  other — to  choose  for  their  happieness  what 
was  pleaseing  to  their  animal  sense,  or  what  was  agreeable  to  their  rational 
and  spiritual  part — and  it  being  His  will  and  their  true  interest  and  happie 
ness  that  they  should  favour  and  cultivate  the  latter  rather  than  the  former, 
did  prove  them  by  a  plain  and  obvious  test,  even  that  of  the  fruit  of  the 
forbidden  tree. 

I  doubt  nothing  but  it  had  all  about  it  that  was  apt  to  gratifie  sense — 
beautie  to  please  the  eye,  fragrance  to  please  the  smell,  flavour  the  taste, 
gentleness  the  touch,  and  in  likelihood  its  juice  was  such  as  not  only  pleased 
but  was  also  an  incentive  to  carnall  pleasure.  To  detcrr  from  this  bad  choice, 
even  in  placing  their  felicity  in  carnall  gratifications,  God  dealt  with  them 
by  threats  of  punishment  and  promisses  of  reward.  The  punishment  He 
thrcatncd  was  Death,  which  in  greatest  probability  was  to  be  effected  by  the 
removal  of  his  Divine  Spirit  or  Image,  and  throwing  out  of  Paradise,  in 
which  was  the  Tree  of  Life,  and  which  Paradise  was  both  an  emblem  and  a 
pledge  of  the  glorious  immortality  wherewith  they  were  to  be  crowned,  011 
supposition  of  their  preferring  a  rational  and  spiritual  happicncss  to.  one  that 
was  animal  and  earthly.  The  rewards  ha  promised  were — Dominion  over 
the  creatures  of  the  earth  (which  dominion  is  a  branch  of  Divine  prerogative), 
the  pleasant  Garden  of  Eden,  in  which  was  all  that  reasonably  could  preserve 
them  in  being  and  well  being  whyle  in  this  lower  world,  and  which,  as  is 
said,  was  a  pledge  and  emblem  of  the  nobler  Paradise  above,  that  afforded 
anc  indefectable  and  endless  felicity. 

The  duty,  then,  of  Adam,  stood  in  the  Love  of  God,  and  that  signified 
by  obedience  to  His  Laws  ;  and  then  in  placeing  his  felicity  not  in  the 
enjoyment  of  a  terrestrial  happieness,  tlio  ample  and  of  long  continuance,  but 
in  the  compleat  fruition  of  God  throughout  all  eternity.  In  order  to  these 
ends  he  was  to  temper  his  animal  appetites,  and  guard  his  senses  against  all 
temptations  that  might  excite  in  him  any  inordinate  or  immoderate  desire, 
any  violent  bent  after  any  forbidden  object,  or  any  excessive  inclination 
toward  that  which  he  was  allowed  to  love  in  a  temperate  degree.  This 
could  not  but  render  him  happy  in  this  life,  and  give  him  a  sure  title  to  the 
supernaturall  happieness  in  the  highest  Heavens.  That  happieness  which  is 


158  ADAM'S  SIN  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES. 

the  gift  of  God  purely,  is  not  the  effect  of  piety  ami  virtue,  or  comes  to  the 
creature  hy  the  natural  efticiencic  of  these,  but  which  is  supernatural!,  and 
not  due  either  to  our  merit  or  to  our  nature. 


The  generality  looking  on  Adam's  sin  with  a  glance  of  the  eye  too 
superficially,  have  interpreted  the  punishment  of  it  to  be  anc  act  of  too  great 
severity  in  Clod:  yet  it  is  far  from  being  such  if  narrowly  inspected  and 
examined  according  to  the  rules  of  strict  equity.  They  were  not  as  yet 
under  the  power  of  any  vicious  habit ;  but  their  will  did  hang  in  ane  even 
ballance.  They  had  reason,  yea  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  also  God's  im- 
mediat  communications,  to  give  their  choice  a  right  determination,  together 
with  God's  authoritative  Commands,  and  that  inforccd  with  the  strongest 
sanctions  of  rewards  and  punishments,  and  these  of  the  highest  importance. 
Their  sin,  therefore,  was  that  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  that  sin  signifies 
anc  iniquity  committed  in  the  presence  of  and  wilfully  against  the  dictate  of 
that  Glorious  Person,  ^Vho  is  supposed  to  have  visibly  manifested  His 
presence  hy  the  Shcchinah,  which  in  Scripture  is  called  the  Glory  of  God, 
as  was  the  appearance  on  Mount  Sinai,  the  Cloud  and  the  Pillar  of  Fire,  the 
frequent  appearances  in  the  Tabernacle  and  Temple,  at  the  Baptism  of  our 
Lord,  and  His  Transfiguration  on  the  Mount.  The  sin  was  committed  at  the 
importunity  of  ane  offending  Angell,  and  against  the  express  Command  of 
God,  their  Creator,  their  undoubted  Soveraigne,  and  most  bountifull  Bene 
factor.  This,  by  anc  insinuation  of  falsehood  in  God,  as  if  He  had  not 
proposed  the  most  satisfyeing  felicitie  to  them,  but  that  that  felicity  which 
would  follow  on  eating  the  forbidden  fruit  would  far  excell  that  proposed  by 
Ciod  (for  this  I  take  to  be  the  importance  of  knowing  good  and  evil);  that  the 
punishment  of  Death,  which  God  had  threatened,  would  not  follow  upon  the 
act  of  eating  the  forbidden  fruitt — the  believcing  of  which  fallacious  asser 
tion  implyed  a  denyall  of  the  Divync  veracitie.  All  these  aggravations 
considered  and  laid  together,  rendered  the  sin  very  hainous  ;  so  that  thcr 
was  an  exact  proportion  betwixt  it  and  the  punishment  of  Death  which  was 
thrcatncd  and  actually  inflicted. 

The  consequences  of  the  sin  was  Death,  and,  first,  the  spiritual  one  ;  for 
then  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  the  Divine  Image  or  Likeness,  departed,  and  signi- 
fyed  His  departure  by  the  removall  of  His  visible  presence,  or  His  glory, 
which  so  splendidly  did  shine  about  our  first  parents,  that  they  did  not  know 
or  sec  their  nakedness,  which  sight  raised  shame  in  them,  which  passion  was 
a  manifest  proof  of  a  disorder  that  then  invaded  their  hitherto  undisturbed 
nature.  Moreover,  the  removall  of  the  Holy  Spirit  did  wholly  incapacitate 
them  for  the  everlasting  fruition  and  vision  of  God  in  the  highest  Heavens, 
which  is  the  supernatural  reward  and  the  pure  gift  of  God. 

Secondly,  their  animal  appetites  now  got  loose  reines,  and  their  reason, 
or  the  Divine  breathing,  being  destitute  of  the  assistances  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
was  not  match  for  the  animal  appetites,  now  become  licentious.  Besides, 
their  reason  itself  was  in  a  great  degree  debauched,  by  yielding  assent  so 
rashly  to  the  false  suggestions  of  the  Serpent. 

Thirdly,  the  body,  which  might  have  been  preserved  from  corruption, 
hy  eating  the  fruit  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  now  became  corruptible,  lyahle  to 
diseases,  and  to  dissolution  by  death. 

Fourthly,  man  by  the  Fall  lost  his  dominion  over  the  creatures  of  this 


THE  EFFECT  OF  THE  FALL  ON  POSTEEITY.  159 

lower  world,  which  dominion  was  a  vast  privilege,  indeed,  anc  eminent 
communication  of  God's  soveraignty,  some  footsteps  only  now  remaining, 
and  which  as  yet  are  visible,  if  not  abused  by  cowardice  or  weakness,  unbe 
coming  the  dignity  of  humane  nature. 

Fifthly,  our  first  parents  by  their  Fall  fell  under  the  dominion  of  the 
Devil,  even  as  the  conquered  party  comes  under  the  yoke  of  the  conqueror. 
The  Holy  Scriptures  inform  us  of  orders  and  classes  of  spiritual  powers  ; 
of  Principalities,  Powers,  Dominions,  and  Thrones.  The  ancient  Heathen 
were  perswaded  of  this,  and  reason  itselfe  obleidgeth  us  to  presume  that  ther 
are  innumerable  hosts  of  these  invincible  beings  in  these  immense  and  vastly 
numerous  regions  which  roul  over  our  heads  and  surround  us.  Lucifer, 
with  his  subordinate  Angels,  soon  left  his  first  station  (his  ciKrjr^iov ,  i.e.,  the 
mansion  in  Heaven  wher  he  had  his  first  Principality),  and  was  condemned 
for  his  breach  of  order,  and  trespassing  on  the  station  assigned  by  the  Most 
High,  unto  these  sublunary  regions,  wher,  being  envious  of  the  excellent 
state  which  our  first  parents  enjoyed,  and  of  the  far  more  excellent  they  had 
in  reversion,  by  fraud  seduced  them  into  sin  ;  and  thus  they  fell  under  his 
dominion.  The  Scripture  hence  calls  him  the  Prince  of  the  Power  of  the 
Air,  and  the  god  of  this  world,  the  Prince  of  Darkness,  as  this  lower  world 
is  contradistinguished  from  the  upper  regions,  which  arc  those  of  light.  The 
effects  of  this  his  dominion  are  divers,  as  illusions  suggested  to  the  imagina 
tion  under  semblances  of  truth ;  hence  said  to  transform  himself  into  an 
Angel  of  Light,  to  counterfitt  these  truths  which  the  good  Angels  com 
municate  by  the  Order  of  God.  His  presenting  to  the  fancy  sensual  and 
earthly  things,  under  the  most  amiable  and  desircablc  forms  ;  all  with  his 
first  intention,  to  make  us  despise  the  spiritual,  rational,  and  celestial 
felicity,  and  to  take  in  with  the  carnal,  animal,  and  earthly  one.  His 
ingadgeing  some  persons  and  nations  even  to  worship  and  serve  him,  and  to 
goe  by  the  dictate  of  their  passions  in  opposition  to  the  Commands  of  God. 
His  inducing  persons  and  societies  to  enter  into  covenant  with  him,  and  to 
transact  these  covenants  by  mysteries ;  thus  apcing  the  procedure  of  the 
true  God  in  His  actings  with  His  peculiar  people.  His  vexing  and  infesting 
these  miserable  men  in  the  other  world  or  separate  state,  who  have  been 
under  his  dominion  in  this. 

The  Dad  F.jf'cct  which  the  Sin  of  our  First  -Parent*  hud  on  their  Poxteritie. 

I  shall  not  here  enter  into  the  dispute,  managed  with  perhaps  too  much 
heat,  between  the  Lutherians  and  Calvinists.  The  former  maintain  the  soul 
to  be  traduced  by  ordinary  generation  from  the  parents  to  the  posterity  ;  the 
latter  will  have  the  soul  created  and  infused.  I  am  as  unwilling  to  plunge 
into  Controversies  as  unskillfull  in  them.  The  first  Christians  favour  the 
Lutherian  syde  ;  and  that  of  the  Calvinists  was  not,  for  ought  I  know,  heard 
of  before  the  time  of  Augustine.  The  former,  I  think,  explains  and  takes  off 
the  difficulties  much  better  than  the  latter,  and  this  makes  it  preferrable  to 
the  other,  imless  it  can  be  show'n  that  it  involves  some  gross  absurdity. 

However,  it  is  plain  that  all  the  descendants  of  Adam  have,  in  the  first 
place,  lost  all  the  priviledges  to  which  they  had  a  title,  on  supposition  of 
his  perseverance  in  innocence.  The  priviledges  which  are  set  down  in  that 
head  concerning  his  innocence,  were  the  free  gifts  of  God,  acts  of  pure  grace ; 
and  God  was  not  obleidged  by  His  essential  equity  to  continue  them  with 


100  MAN'S  RECOVERY. 

Adam  otherwise  than  on  his  good  behaviour,  much  less  to  derive  them  on 
his  posterity. 

The  posterity,  therefore,  of  Adam  have  incurred  all  the  cfiects_  and 
consequences  of  'his  forfeiture1  ;  they  have  lost  the  Spirit  and  the  Divine 
Image,  consequently  the  iniinortalitie  of  the  body  and  the  supernatural 
happieness  in  the  highest  Heavens.  They  have  lost  the  absolute  dominion 
over  the  creatures  here  on  earth,  and  the  great  privilege  of  direct  access  to 
God.  The  animal  appetites  are  now  strong  and  lively.  Reason  unassisted 
by  the  Spirit  is  not  of  sufficient  power  to  temper  and  keep  them  at  rights. 
Reason  itself  is  debauched  by  Satanical  suggestions,  and  it  which  was 
designed  for  a  ruler  over  them  is  become  their  patron  and  advocat.  Hence 
the  libertie  is  weakened,  the  will  standing  no  more  in  anc  equall  ballancc, 
but  hath  a  strong  bent  in  favour  of  the  animal  appetites,  pride  and  pleasure. 
The  sons  of  Adam,  as  such,  arc  under  the  dominion  of  the  ])evill,  and 
condemn'd  to  share  in  that  punishment  to  which  he  is  awarded.  Hence  in 
a  state  of  hostility  with  God  and  the  subordinate  celestial  Towers;  hence 
desecrated  and  polluted,  and  unworthy  to  stand  in  the  presence  of  God. 


Such  is  the  exuberant  goodness  of  God  towards  man,  that  He  hath  from 
the  beginning  proposed  overtures  of  reconciliation  with  him  ;  and  thus  in 
consequence  of  a  Covenant  made  between  the  Father,  the  Fountain  of  the 
Deity,  and  His  Son  the  Eternal  Word,  by  "Whom  the  worlds  were  made,  and 
AYho  so  much  interested  Himsclfe  in  the  formation  of  the  first  man,  as  first 
to  endue  him  with  reason,  on  which  the  Eternal  Light  shineth,  and  then 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Image  of  the  Eternal  Son.  This  was  so  much 
considered  by  the  more  divine  Philosophers  at  and  after  our  Saviour's  time, 
that  they  stile  our  Lord  the  Archetypal,  i.e.,  the  original  and  true  man  ;  and 
all  other  men  the  Ideal,  i.e.,  the  types  and  images  of  Him,  the  true  one. 
However,  in  order  to  this  reconciliation,  He  makes  a  gracious  promise  of  a 
Saviour  (Gen.  iii.  15),  "Who  should  in  the  fullness  of  time  conquer  the  Devil, 
and  consequently  reinstate  man  in  terms  of  perfect  reconciliation  with  God, 
and  restore  him'to  all  his  lost  privilcdges.  Adam  being  encouraged  by  this 
promise,  God  entered  into  Covenant  with  him.  This  may  be  gathered  from 
Gen.  v.  3,  whcr  Scth,  the  first  Patriarch  after  Adam,  with  whom  God 
renewed  His  Covenant,  is  said  to  have  been  begot  in  Adam's  own  likeness, 
which  would  not  have  been  said  if  Adam  had  not  bcin  receiv'd  into  favour 
with  God.  As  God  condescended  to  enter  into  terms  of  reconciliation  with 
Adam,  so  in  great  probability  with  his  first  sons,  Cain  and  Abel,  who,  in 
pursuance  of  this  proposal  made  by  God,  offered  up  sacrifice.  The  sacrifice 
offered  by  Abel  being  a  bloody  one,  was  the  most  acceptable  of  the  two  ;  for 
every  expiatory  sacrifice  is  a  substitution  of  the  thing  sacrificed  in  the  room 
and  stead  of  the  sacrificer,  whose  life  is  supposed  to  be  forfeited  to  God  for 
his  sin  ;  and  therefor  the  death  of  a  living  creature  is  a  more  proper  and 
expressive  commutation  than  that  of  fruits.  Hence  Abel's  sacrifice  was 
acceptable,  and  that  of  Cain  rejected.  Moreover,  Abel's  sacrifice  was  more 
typical  of  our  Lord's  great  sacrifice  on  the  Cross,  and  more  agreeable  to  that 
great  rule  which  seems  to  have  obtained  and  bein  generally  received  from 
the  beginning  by  all  men,  that  without  blood  ther  is  no  remission  of  sin. 
Cain  having  murdered  Abel,  and  for  this  being  banished  that  part  of  the 


NONE  SAVED  BUT  THOSE  WHO  ARE  IN  COVENANT.      1G1 

earth  in  which  Adam  and  these  others  of  his  posteritie  which  were  interested 
in  this  new  Covenant  dwelt,  the  Covenant  was  made  with  Scth,  as  the 
Patriarch  next  to  these.  [Xot<>. — That  Adam  and  Eve  being  created  in  full 
bodily  perfection,  they  being  also  enjoyned  to  and  blest  with  fruitfulness,  as 
being  also  one  hundred  years  old  when  Seth  was  born,  could  not  but  have  had 
a  very  numerous  issue  besides  Cain  and  Abel  befor  the  birth  of  Scth.]  That 
Seth  was  the  first  Patriarch  after  Adam,  with  whom  Clod  entered  into 
Covenant,  appears  from  Gen.  iv.  20,  "then  began  men  to  call  on  the  name 
of  the  Lord."  The  Hebrew  will  also  signific  to  be  called  by  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  The  Scptuagint  is  expressly  in  the  passive,  called  by  the  name  of 
the  Lord ;  which  in  the  language  of  the  Scripture  still  signifies  a  person  or 
people  peculiar  unto  God,  and  distinguished  from  all  others.  Thus  Still 
and  his  descendants,  the  successive  Patriarchs,  which  are  recorded  Gen.  v., 
were  the  first  people  after  the  Fall  with  whom  God,  in  His  groat  grace, 
condescended  to  enter  into  Covenant.  This  furder  appears  from  Gen.  vi.  '2, 
&c.,  wher  ther  is  a  plain  distinction  made  betAveen  the  Sons  of  God  (a  term 
appropriate  to  those  in  Covenant  with  Him)  and  the  daughters  of  men,  the 
descendants,  viz.,  of  Scth  and  those  of  Cain;  and  then,  verse  !-).  God  tells 
them  His  Spirit,  which  was  given  to  these  sons  of  God,  should  not  alwaycs 
strive  with  man,  for  that  he  also  is  flesh  ;  therefor  threatens  the  breach  of 
this  Covenant  by  the  removal  of  His  Spirit,  Who  was  resisted  and  contended 
with  by  these  unhallowed  mariages  with  persons  without  the  Covenant. 

Inference  1st.  Thus,  then,  reconciliation  with  God,  and  consequently  a 
title  to  the  blessings  He  is  pleased  to  promise,  can  be  pleaded  by  none  save 
such  as  arc  in  Covenant  with  Him.  God  cannot  hence  be  thought  severe  or 
partial,  seeing  His  promised  blessings  are  acts  of  grace,  and  which  He  is  not 
bound  to  bestow  on  any  offending  creature  by  any  obligation  of  strict  equity, 
seeing  all  have  access  to  His  Covenants  who  know  them,  and  are  willing  to 
enter  into  them,  seeing  that  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  these  acts  of  grace 
promised  in  this  Covenant,  it  is  but  reasonable  that  He  should  limitt  and  fix 
the  conditions,  and  that  they  should  not  be  left  to  the  choice  of  the  creature, 
tho  his  reasonings  were  never  so  specious.  Perhaps  the  not  attending  to 
this  is  the  cause  of  all  these  deplorable  divisions  and  subdivisions  that  are 
among  Christians.  Some  think  it  reasonable  that  God  should  deal  with 
them  on  their  performance  of  such  conditions.  The  Deist,  if  he  worship 
God  and  doe  righteousness,  reckons  himselfe  intitled  to  God's  favour ;  the 
Socinian,  if  he  believes  in  the  Man  Christ,  pbeycs  his  moral  precepts  and 
imitates  his  example  ;  .the  Latitudinarian,  if  he  lives  holyly,  righteously, 
and  soberly  in  any  or  in  no  communion ;  the  Enthusiast,  or  he  who  pleads 
inspiration,  if  he  love  God,  and  be  so  resigned  as  that  (as  he  conceits)  in  all 
things  he  follows  the  dictates  of  the  spirit  within  Him.  Thus  the  reason  of 
these  scandalous  divisions  is  grounded  on  this  mistake,  that  they  fancie  the 
blessings  and  priviledgcs  which  God  hath  promised  arc  not  acts  of  pure  grace, 
and  arbitrary  in  God  to  give  antecedently  to  His  premisses;  that  ther  is  a 
proportion  between  the  merit  of  the  creature  and  these  benefites  and  privi- 
ledges  ;  or  that  these  benefites  which  God  hath  promissed  are  none  other 
than  the  resultance  of  their  performance,  by  way  of  natural  efficiency. 
Here  I  own  that  the  mortification  of  our  animal  bents,  and  the  Love  of  God 
and  goodness,  are  indeed  necessary  dispositions  for  the  influences  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  in  this  life,  and  for  the  vision  and  enjoyment  of  God  in  the 
other ;  yet  I  cannot  think  that  either  of  these,  especially  the  latter,  doth 

VOL.  II.  X 


1G2  THE  MEANING  OF  "THE  ELECT." 

nccessarly  result  by  way  of  natural  casuality  from  the  other.  I  am  sure  the 
Scripture  proposes'  both,  especially  the  latter,  as  a  reward.  The  Scripture 
supposeth  both  as  the  gifts  and  acts  of  God's  free  grace.  Those  who  goe  on 
the  principle  of  the  reward  being  a  natural  result  of  our  duty,  have  no  more 
than  a  mere  presumption  for  what  they  conclude ;  and  on  this  supposition 
Epictetus  or  Porphiry  can  bid  as  fair  for  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  as  S.  Peter 
or  S.  Paul— all  which  is  contrary  to  the  whole  tenor  of  the  Scriptures  of 
both  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  and  to  the  general  bcliefe  and  practice  of 
the  first  Christians.  And  if  it  be  once  granted  that  God  is  the  donor  of  the 
Spirit  in  this  life,  and  of  Glory  in  the  highest  Heavens  (which  must  be 
granted  if  He  is  considered  as  a  free  agent,  acting  alwayes  by  ane  infinite 
perfeit  reason),  then  His  essential  equity  obleidges  Him  to  act  by  proportion; 
and  between  our  utmost  mortification  and  these  great  rewards,  ther  is  no 
proportion — the  very  common  blessings  and  favours  wee  enjoy  being  ade 
quate  to  all  we  can  doe.  After  ye  have  done  all  these  things,  reckon  your 
selves  but  unprofitable  servants. 

Inference  2nd.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  the  terms  Elect  and  Reprobate, 
mentioned  in  Scripture,  in  their  primary  signification,  import  no  more  than 
those  within  and  without  the  Covenant.  It's  plain  ther  is  a  pretension  of 
some,  and  ane  election  of  others.  That  Clod  hath  not  so  much  as  made 
knowen  to  many  of  the  sons  of  Adam  His  intention  to  enter  in  Covenant 
with  them,  but  that  these  who  thus  live  in  invincible  ignorance  are  damned 
from  all  eternity  to  the  fire  unquenchable,  is  not  reasonably  reconcilable 
with  the  Divine  Attributes,  and  doth  not  appear  from  lievelation.  It  is  very 
true  that  these  to  whom  the  Gospel  is  sufficiently  revealed,  and  yet  reject  it, 
are  in  the  Scripture  condemned  to  this  dreadfull  punishment.  These  also 
who,  haveing  imbraccd  the  Gospel  and  yet  live  in  wilfull  and  habitual  sin, 
are,  as  the  former,  supposed  to  preferr  the  service  of  the  Devil  to  that  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  consequently  are  deprived  of  the  benefitts  purchased  by 
Him,  and  are  condemned  to  share  in  the  fate  of  that  master  whom  they  have 
chosen. 

But,  then,  [th<V;  these  who  never  had  the  Gospel  sufficiently  revealed  to 
them  be  not  adjudged  to  the  place  of  torment  prepared  for  the  Devil  and  his 
Angels,  yet  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  called  but  are  past  by,  therefor  they 
are  Reprobate  ;  as  on  the  other  hand,  these  within  the  Covenant  are  in 
Scripture  called  Elect.  This  not  on  the  account  of  any  decree  from  all 
eternity,  but  indeed  on  the  account  of  that  illustrious  state  into  which  they 
are  exalted,  as  being  in  Covenant  with  God.  These  termcs  Elect,  Sons  of 
God,  given  out  of  the  world,  being  terms  borrowed  from  the  usage  of  these 
times,  and  appropriat  to  those  who  have  the  honor  and  happieness  of  being 
initiated  in  the  Christian  Covenant.  In  the  meantime  the  Elect,  in  a  strict 
and  proper  sense,  doth  indeed  signifie  those  who  sincerely  live  up  to  the 
terms  of  that  Holy  Covenant;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  these  who  renounce 
the  Faith,  haveing  once  embraced  it,  Hereticks,  Schismaticks,  and  these  who 
impenitently  contiime  in  their  sins,  or  who  reject  the  Gospel  after  it  hath 
been  sufficiently  declared  to  them,  are  also  Eeprobate  in  the  most  true  and 
proper  sense.  These  are  the  goats  on  the  left  hand,  the  withered  branches 
that  are  lopt  off  and  condemned  to  the  fire  ;  these  are  they  who,  according  to 
S.  Jude,  are  like  to  the  Angels  who  left  their  first  habitation,  have  forsaken 
that  holy,  happy,  and  honourable  state  into  which  they  were  exalted. 
Judas,  in  common  with  our  Lord's  Disciples,  is  said  to  be  given  out  of  the 


GOD'S  UXCOYEXAXTED  MEliCIES.  108 

world,  and  tins  is  that  very  thing  with  Chosen  or  Eleet.  All  the  Corinthians, 
indiscriminately,  arc  called  Saints  and  Sanctified,  tho  many  of  them  were 
guilty  of  hainous  sins,  and  expressly  they  arc  called  carnal,  on  account  of 
their  divisions,  their  proplianations,  and  other  immoralities  ;  so  that  all 
within  the  Covenant,  in  a  large  sense,  are  Elect,  and  these  without  are 
Reprobates.  All  who  live  up  to  the  terms  of  the  Covenant  are  Elect,  in  a 
strict  sense,  and  those  who  wilfully  refuse  to  enter  into  it,  or,  having  entered, 
do  break  the  same,  either  by  totall  Apostacy,  by  Heresie,  Schism,  or  obstinacie 
in  sin,  are  Reprobates.  The  ground  of  all  the  mistake  in  these  disputes, 
is  the  not  considering  ane  interest  in  the  Christian  Covenant  as  a  sublime 
and  distinguished  state,  far  exalted  above  the  very  highest  dignities  here  on 
earth. 

Inference  od.  But  tin")  none  have  a  title  to  the  promises  of  God  save 
such  as  are  in  Covenant  with  Him  ;  tho  all  these  who  are  thus  in  Covenant 
are  Elect  in  a  large  sense,  notwithstanding  of  unmortined  evil  habits  ;  thn 
these  who,  being  in  Covenant  with  God,  and  live  up  to  the  conditions  of  the 
Covenant,  are  Elect  in  a  strict  sense  ;  yet  it  doth  not  follow  that  such  pious 
persons  as  are  not  within  the  Covenant  are  Damned.  God  forbid  :  nay,  they 
arc  saved  on  the  head  of  God's  uncovenanted  goodness  ;  provided  always 
that  this  defect  be  the  effect  of  invincible  ignorance,  and  not  of  negligence  or 
willfull  obstinacy  against  the  truth  when  clearly  proposed  to  them.  And  in 
case,  also,  of  insuperable  prejudice  (as  when  one  is  terrified  to  change  from 
what  he  is  to  that  which  is  really  and  in  itselfc  better,  tho  worse  in  the 
conceit  of  the  frighted  person,  through  fear  of  sinning  against  God),  Mercy 
is  patent  to  such,  and  Charity  should  presume  strongly  in  their  favours, 
since  invincible  ignorance  still  excuseth.  And  then  these  labour  under  such 
prejudices  as  arise  from  a  mistaken  fear  of  God,  are  not  free  agents  in  this 
respect,  and  therefore  their  error  is  not  voluntary.  In  the  meantime,  these 
cannot  exculpate  themselves  who  allow  themselves  in  willfull  negligence  in 
opposition  to  the  truth,  through  bitter  zeal,  love  of  party,  or  worldly  interest ; 
or  these  who  trust  to  this  extraordinary  uncovenanted  goodness  in  God, 
when  the  ordinary  way  is  at  hand  and  in  their  oiler.  A  Monarch  may  confer 
these  favours  on  a  well-deserving  forreigner,  to  which  he  hath  no  title  in 
Law,  but  which  arc  peculiar  to  his  native  subjects  ;  but  if  this  forreigner 
willfully  coutemnc  Naturalization  when  profer'd,  proudly  insists  on  his  merit, 
and  is  not  under  any  mistaken  terrors  of  the  displeasure  of  the  Monarch  if 
he  should  change  his  state  from  that  of  a  forreigner  to  that  of  a  naturalized 
citizen,  then  neither  he  himself  nor  any  other  person  should  presume  chari 
tably  in  his  behalf.  I  thought  ht  to  remark  these  things  as  to  Divine 
Covenants  in  general,  and  which  more  specially  concern  the  great  and  ever 
lasting  Covenant  through  Jesus  Christ. 

Of  the  Covenant  irith  Abrnhaw. 

When  God  had  destroyed  by  the  Deluge  the  whole  old  World,  the 
descendants  of  Seth,  His  offending  Church,  as  well  as  the  wicked  posteritie 
of  Cain,  and  saved  none  alive  except  Noah  and  his  family,  we  read  not  of  any 
Covenant  made  between  God  and  man  till  that  with  Abraham.  It's  true  God 
assured  Noah  that  He  no  more  would  destroy  the  earth  by  water ;  and  the 
unbeliefe  of  this  promise  being  the  reason  of  building  the  Tower  of  Babel,  as 
a  fence  against  any  future  Deluge,  inferred  the  dispersion  of  the  then 


IG-i  GOD'S  COVENANT  AlrTEll  THE  FLOOD. 

numerous  posterity  of  Noah  ;  but  then  we  hear  not  of  any  formal  Covenant 
made  with  men  as  a  body  politick.  It  is  also  true  that  ther  were  heads  of 
families  who,  with  their  subject  descendants,  worshiped  the  true  and  liveing 
(lod,  without  regard  to  the  demons  worshiped  by  other  Patriarchs,  and  these 
who  were  descended  of  and  subject  to  them.  Such  were  Melchisedeck, 
Abiinelech  (King  of  Gcrar),  and,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  learned, 
Job  and  his  friends.  But  then  it  is  plain  that  God  entered  into  Covenant  with 
Abraham  and  his  posterity  by  Sarah  ;  and  because  his  seed  was  included  in 
that  Covenant,  therefor  the  Sacrament  of  Circumcision,  which  was  that  of 
Initiation,  was  instituted.  By  vertue  of  this  Covenant,  God  obleidged 
Himsclfe  to  confer  ample  blessings  on  him  and  his  posterity,  such  as  their 
being  His  peculiar  people,  that  they  should  be  under  His  immediate  care  and 
protection,  that  afterward  He  would  Consecrate  the  whole  Land  of  Canaan, 
and  give  it  them  for  ane  inheritance  ;  but  chiefly,  that  the  Mcssias,  promised 
from  the  beginning,  should  descend  of  his  seed  as  to  His  human  nature. 
Abraham  and  his  posteritie  were,  by  virtue  of  this  Covenant,  taken  obleidged 
to  worship  and  serve  the  true  and  liveing  God,  and  Him  alone,  exclusive  of 
all  other  Deities  ;  and  this  Covenant  was  solemnly  struck  by  Sacrifice. 

Here  it  will  not  be  amiss  to  observe,  that  Demons,  whether  Lucifer  and 
his  subordinat  Angels,  or  the  Ghosts  of  the  Antediluvian  Patriarchs,  did 
imitate  the  true  (rod  in  entering  into  Covenant  with  the  respective  votaries 
by  Sacrifice  and  other  Mystical  Symbols,  which  is  evident  both  from  Sacred 
and  the  most  ancient  profane  History.  This  is  so  true,  that  ther  was  no 
Nation  then  known  on  the  earth  which  was  not  in  Covenant  with  their 
respective  Deities — entering  into  Covenants  being  then  so  essential  to  all 
Keligion,  good  and  bad,  and  the  opposition  among  their  Deities  being  the 
chief  ground  of  their  mutual  hostilities. 

But  to  return.  The  first  formal  Covenant  between  God  and  men  after 
the  Flood,  was  that  with  Abraham  and  his  seed  by  Sarah,  not  including  the 
descendants  either  of  Hagar  or  Kethurah,  otherwise  than  what  concern'd 
their  single  persons;  tho,  as  descended  of  the  Father  of  the  Faithful,  they 
had  a  title  to  temporal  blessings.  The  posteritie  of  Ishmael  became  a  mighty 
nation,  and  that  of  Keturah  indeed  did  Avorship  the  true  God,  and  in  the 
Avilderness  were  admitted  into  Covenant,  being  represented  by  Jethro,  the 
father-in-law  of  Moses,  and  are  allwaycs  called  the  Kenites.  But  this 
Covenant  with  Abraham  had,  besides  the  literal,  a  mystical  signification 
also  ;  for  the  Apostle  S.  Paul  assures  us  that  this  Covenant  with  him  derived 
blessings  on  two  sorts  of  his  posterities — these  of  his  flesh,  and  these  of  his 
faith.  These  of  his  flesh  were  the  Jewes  who  did  not  imbrace  the  Gospel ; 
these  of  his  faith  are  all  such  Jewes  as  became  proselytes  to  Jesus  Christ 
(Gal.  iii.  10,  &c.) ;  yea.  and  all  such  Gentiles  as  are  listed  under  the  banner 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Our  Lord  descended  of  him  as  to  His  human  nature  ;  and 
all  such  as  are  entered  into  the  Christian  Covenant  by  Baptism,  partakeing 
of  the  Divine  nature  derived  from  Jesus  Christ  in  this  sense,  are  the  childrein 
of  Abraham,  and  were  included  in  that  Covenant  made  with  him. 


Tho  (rod,  as  supreme  Lord  of  the  world,  might  by  vertue  of  His  absolute 
empire,  exact  what  worship  and  service  He  pleases  of  all  men  indiscrimi 
nately  ;  tho  He  permitted  the  generalise  of  men  to  enter  into  Covenants 


GOD'S  PRIVILEGES.  165 

with  Demons,  and  yet  did  overrule  and  keep  them  in  subordination  to  Him 
selfe  ;  yet  He  hath  been  pleased  to  distinguish  some  people  in  all  ages  to  he 
peculiar  to  Himselfe  ;  and  this  peculiarity  or  appropriation  hath  ever  been 
made  by  way  of  Covenant.  This  was  ahvaycs  reckoned  the  chiefcst  privi- 
ledge  and  choicest  blessing ;  and  God,  in  pursuance  of  His  Covenant  with 
Abraham,  was  pleased  to  bring  the  descendants  of  this  and  the  other 
Patriarchs  which  came  of  him  out  of  the  Land  of  Egypt,  and  on  Mount 
Sinai,  in  Arabia,  did,  after  a  most  solemn  and  astonishing  manner,  enter 
into  Covenant  with  that  people. 

Anent  this  august  Covenant,  two  things  arc  to  be  considered — First, 
the  priviledges  and  blessings  which  God  oblcidged  Himself  to  conferr  on 
them.  2dly.  The  conditions  by  which  they  were  to  qualiiie  themselves  for 
the  actual  reception  and  application  of  these  benefitcs. 

I.  The  priviledges  and  blessings  which  (rod  obleidged  Himselfe  to 
conferr  on  them ;  and  these  were  cither  of  a  spirituall  or  of  a  temporall 
nature. 

1.  He  oblcidged  Himselfe  to  be  their  God  in  particular,  and  this  exclu 
sive  of  the  interposition  of  any  of  these  Deities  Avliich  other  nations  did 
worship.  Again,  the  Eternal  Word,  the  Son  of  God,  was  to  be  their  Presi 
dent,  Protector,  and  Patron.  Hence  their  fathers  arc  said  by  the  Apostle 
to  have  tempted  Christ  in  the  AYilderness  ;  hence  He  is  called  the  Spiritual 
Eock,  out  of  which  the  waters  issued  that  refreshed  them  in  the  Wilderness. 
He  was  that  Cloud  which  skrecncd  them  from  the  heat  of  the  day,  and  that 
Pillar  of  Eire  which  fenced  them  from  the  injuries  of  the  night.  He  was  to 
them  that  Angel  of  the  Covenant  (Mai.  iii.  1),  Who  visibly  appeared  to  them 
in  their  exigencies;  that  Shechinah,  or  the  Glory  of  God,  which  was  often 
manifested  after  a  sensible  manner  in  their  Tabernacle  and  Temple,  particu 
larly  in  the  Holy  of  Holies.  He  it  was  "Who  gave  responses  in  arduous  cases 
by  the  Trim  and  Thumhn  (Acts  vii.  :-38)  of  their  High  Priests.  He  it  was 
Who  directed  the  Angel  that  delivered  the  Law  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  inspired 
their  Prophets  with  the  knowledge  of  future  events.  By  this  interposition 
all  their  Sacrifices  were  accepted,  and  became  available  to  the  ends  for  which 
they  were  offered.  Indeed  He  was  the  Patron  of  all  the  people  that  were  in 
Covenant  wl  God  from  the  beginning ;  hence,  such  people  arc  called  Sons  of 
God  (Hob.  i.  0) ;  yea,  gods  themselves,  by  way  of  emiiicncy  above  all  other 
people.  If  ye  call  them  gods  to  whom  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Eternal 
Son,  came,  ttc.  He  was  Patron,  consequently,  of  the  Childreiii  of  Israel. 
I  own  that  all  this  was  not  clearly  understood  by  the  body  of  the  people, 
but  by  these  of  more  eminent  pietie  ;  by  their  Prophets,  and  by  those  of 
them  who,  sometime  before  the  comeing  of  the  Messias,  began  to  studie  the 
spiritual  meaning  of  this  Dispensation  by  Moses.  Besydes  these  spirituall 
advantages,  it  was  a  very  great  one  that  our  Lord,  the  promised  Messiah, 
should,  as  to  His  human  nature,  be  one  of  their  Nation  ;  that  conseqently 
the  first  tender  of  the  Gospel  should  be  made  to  them.  This  priviledge  was 
that  which  most  of  the  Prophets  harped  on,  as  that  which  enhansed  the 
dignity  and  happieness  of  their  Nation  above  that  of  all  others,  and  stated 
it  the  fountain  of  the  amplest  blessing  that  ever  was  derived  to  mankind. 
These  were  the  spirituall  priviledges  to  which  they  were  intitled  by  their 
Covenant. 

But  then,  besides,  they  had  also  assurances  of  temporal  blessings ;  and 
it  is  very  plain  that  the  body  of  the  people  had  no  furder  views  than  these. 


1U<)  MAN'S  CONDITIONS. 

Such  were  their  protection  from  enemies,  or  deliverance  when  at  any  time 
they  were  oppressed,  enslaved,  or  under  deportation  ;  such  were  plentifull 
crops,  wealth,  case,  and  long  life,  particularly  victory  over  their  enemies  in 
time  of  warr  :  and  these  victories  were  often  obtained  by  waves  pretcr- 
naturall,  yea  and  supcrnaturall.  God  stated  llimselfe  their  King.  As  such 
he  choosed  their  rulers  and  generals,  at  least  till  the  time  of  Haul.  Such 
also  was  the  holicncss  of  their  Land  of  Canaan,  of  their  persons  and 
posterities,  of  their  Priests  and  Kings,  of  their  Temple  and  Altars  ;  holyness 
in  this  sense  signifying  that  which  is  separated  from  that  which  is  common, 
and  which  is  dedicated  to  Clod,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  encroached  on 
without  the  guilt  of  a  peculiar  crime. 

These  were  the  priviledges  and  benefits  which  Clod  obleidged  liimselfe 
to  conferr  on  Ilis  ancient  people,  by  vertue  of  this  Covenant.  And  now,  in 
the  next  place,  the  conditions  required  on  their  part  are  to  lie  considered. 

God  hath  ane  indisputable  right  to  our  Worship  and  Service,  as  lie  is 
the  Almighty  Creator,  the  Gracious  Preserver,  and  Supreme  Lord  and 
Proprietor  of  His  creatures.  Hence  it  follows,  that  tho  He  condescends  to 
enter  into  Covenant  with  men,  yet  He  hath  a  full  faculty  of  prescribing  and 
fixing  the  terms  and  conditions  to  which  they  are  bound.  To  enter  into 
Covenant  with  men  is  ane  act  of  chiefest  favour  and  coiidcscention  :  it  is 
what  God  in  no  way  stands  in  need  of.  The  conditions  He  prescribes  arc 
but  necessary  qualifications  for  the  reception  of  the  benefits  which  He 
obleidges  llimselfe  to  bestow  on  His  part,  and  which  are  acts  of  pure  grace, 
which  He  was  not  bound  to  vouchsafe  by  any  antecedent  obligation  of  equity. 
P>esydes,  He  is  perfeitly  wise,  and  knows  exactly  what  is  fit  for  us  to  doe. 
AVas  our  duty  left  to  our  own  contriving,  as  we  could  not  possibly  know  that 
it  would  be  acceptable  unto  God,  so  we  would  never  tix  on  it,  but  would  alter 
and  innovate  eternally,  according  to  the  various  vicissitudes  of  our  condition 
and  the  temper  of  our  bodies,  yea  and  the  incessant  turns  and  reelings  of 
fancy.  "Whcrefor.  as  it  is  most  just,  so  also  most  prudential,  that  God 
should  determine  the  conditions  of  these  Covenants  into  which  He  conde 
scends  to  enter  with  men,  and  that  they  should  be  thoroughly  consenting  to 
these  terms. 

Thus  the  Children  of  Israel  were  thoroughly  consenting  to  these  con 
ditions  ;  they  voluntarly  cursed  themselves  from  Mount  Ebal,  and  invoked 
the  Pivyne  vengeance  011  themselves  in  case  of  non-performance.  And, 
indeed,  this  their  entering  into  Covenant  with  God  is  interpreted  a  marriage 
to  Him ;  hence  their  idolatry  is  called  whoredom,  in  the  uniform  style  of 
the  Prophets. 

This  premised :  The  first  condition  God  prescribed  to  them,  to  which 
they  were  consenting,  and  which  was  fundamental  to  all  the  rest,  is  that 
they  should  love  the  Lord  their  God  with  all  their  heart,  &c.,  and  their 
neighbour  as  themselves.  This  implies  a  resignation  of  themselves  to  God, 
not  only  as  He  is  the  infinitly  perfeit  Being,  the  Almighty  Creator,  Sustainer, 
and  Lord  of  His  creatures,  but  as  He  is  a  God  in  Covenant  with  them, 
imply 'd  in  that  word,  The  Lord  their  God.  And  then,  since  all  and  each  of 
them  were  interested  in  this  Covenant,  therefor  they  were  to  love  one  another 
with  ane  affection  and  sympathie  like  to  that  which  the  members  of  the  same 
bodie  bear  to  one  another.  Their  other  Lawes  are  commonly  ranged  under 
three  heads — The  Levitical,  the  Moral,  and  the  Judicial. 

The  Levitical  are  those  which  respect  their  Keligious  Worship ;  and 


THE  INSTITUTION  OF  PRIESTHOOD.  167 

they  who  consider  them  with  a  judicious  eye,  will  find  them  to  be  indeed 
worthy  of  that  infinite  wisdom  which  did  institute  them.  The  great  God 
Who  graciously  had  stoop'd  so  low  as  to  enter  into  Covenant  with  that 
people,  behooved,  as  such,  to  keep  communion  with  them.  This  He  choosed 
to  doe  by  separating  a  whole  Tribe,  even  that  of  Lcvi,  to  interpose  and 
mediate  between  Him  and  them  ;  to  exact  in  His  name  the  tribute  of  their 
worship  and  service  ;  and  then,  as  personating  Him,  to  apply  unto  and 
confcrr  on  them  the  blessings  promised  by  God.  This  Tribe  of  Levi  was, 
by  God's  own  appointment,  divided  into  three  Orders — The  Levites.  the 
lowest  rank  of  these  Sacred  Orders  ;  the  Priests,  the  superior  ;  and  the  High 
Priest,  the  most  supreme,  who  was  allowed  to  enter  into  the  Holy  of  Holies 
(the  place  of  God's  spcciall  presence),  as  that  eminent  person  who  was 
priviledged  more  near,  direct,  and  immediat  access  to  the  great  and  awfull 
God.  This  wise  institution  conciliates  that  fear  and  reverence,  that  faith 
and  dependance,  which  is  due  from  the  creature  to  the  Creator,  from  the 
subject  to  Him  the  King,  from  the  one  covenanting  party  to  Him  the  other 
infinitly  more  illustrious  and  exalted  party.  And  seeing  Religion,  generally 
considered,  supposeth  God  to  be  a  King,  with  respect  to  His  votaries, 
therefor  very  reason  itselfe  shewes  the  necessity  of  Ministers,  or  Officers  of 
State.  It  is  in  very  rare  instances,  particularly  since  the  first  apostacy,  that 
He  directly  applys  to  men  ;  it  is  by  the  interposition  of  His  Ministers, 
Angels,  or  men.  The  former  are  too  awful  for  our  ilesh  and  blood,  and 
there  are  few  whose  strength  of  mind  is  proportioned  to  such  ane  intercourse. 
It's  ane  effect  of  God's  goodness  and  wisdom  that  He  keeps  communion  with 
us  by  the  intervention  of  creatures  of  our  own  kind.  Their  Consecration  to 
these  Sacred  oilices  animates  the  people  of  God  to  draw  nigh  to  Him,  even 
as  subjects  approach  their  Soveraigne  with  greater  assurance  when  introduced 
to  him  by  their  familiar  friends  and  acquaintance  ;  as,  on  the  other  hand, 
when  people  are  obleidgcd  to  use  the  mediation  of  Officers  and  Ministers  of 
State,  in  order  to  the  reception  of  favours  from  the  Prince,  this  elicites 
reverence  to  his  person,  and  that  is  the  mother  of  duty  and  obedience.  The 
assurance  which  men  have  of  receiving  blessings  from  God,  is  founded  on 
His  Covenant  with  them ;  their  own  reasoning  can  amount  to  no  more  than 
a  presumption  or  a  doubtful  uncertainty.  Now,  Avith  the  same  breath  He  is 
pleased  to  make  His  Covenant,  He  also  oblcidgeth  His  people  to  receive  His 
promised  favours  through  the  ministric  of  His  commissioned  servants. 
Corah  and  his  company  broke  in  upon  this  Divine  establishment,  the  event 
of  which  was  fatal  to  a  prodigie.  The  Kings  Saul  and  Uziah  were  remark 
ably  punished  for  attempts  of  the  like  nature.  Many  subjects  are  capable 
to  know  that  such  a  crime  meets  with  such  a  capital  punishment  as  the  Law 
defines  ;  and  in  questions  of  right  many  may  know  to  which  of  the  competi 
tors  it  doth  appertain ;  yet  none  can  interpose  decisive  and  valid  sentences, 
save  the  authorised  judges. 

The  institution  of  the  Priesthood  was  the  prime  Levitical  Law  ;  the 
other  Lawes  anent  Religion  and  Worship  plainly  suppose  it.  Their  Fasts 
and  Feasts,  their  Sacrifices  for  commemorating  Mercies  received  or  impe- 
trating  such  as  they  wanted,  for  averting  impending  or  incumbent  judge 
ments,  or  secureing  these  benefitcs  they  enjoyed,  were  admirably  well'  fitted 
to  the  particular  genius  of  that  people,  and  their  situation  among  their 
neighbouring  nations.  But  chiefly  they  were  exactly  suited  to  the°grand 
design  of  them,  even  their  mystical  signification  under  the  far  more  sublime 


1GH  THE  M01UL  LAWS. 

Dispensation  which  was  in  view,  and  of  which  this  of  Moses  was  hut  a  figure 
and  a  prelude  to  it.  Such  wore  also  their  various  purifications,  and  their 
restraints  from  such  particular  meats. 

The  next  set  of  Laws  to  which  they  were  obliged,  were  the  Moral  Laws, 
so  called  because  founded  on  prime  equity.  The  First  restrains  religious 
worship  and  service  to  the  true  and  living  God.  and  to  Him  alone,  so  that 
no  other  God  was  to  share  in  their  worship.  This  the  rather,  hecause  that 
people  was  most  prone  to  worship  other  gods  in  conjunction  with  the  true 
God,  on  the  account  of  the  assistance,  protection,  and  influence  which  these 
other  gods  had  on  their  respective  votaries.  The  true  and  liveing  God  did 
expressly  discharge  this  impious  practice,  as  derogatory  to  His  transcendant 
excellencie,  and  interprets  it  alwaycs  to  be  idolatry.  This  He  did,  the,  they 
believed  these  gods  to  be  subordinate  to  Him.  and  that  they  held  no  other 
room  than  that  of  prevalent  intercessors  with  Him,  the  true  and  supreme 
God.  Hence,  as  being  in  Covenant  with  Him,  they  were  allowed  immediat 
'  access  to  Himselfe,  without  application  either  to  good  Angels  or  to  their 
pious  deceased  ancestors. 

The  Second  of  these  Commands  forbids  any  sensible  representations  of 
God  bv  any  thing  created,  that  being  what  would  derogate  from  His  trans 
cendant  excellencie.  And  here  it  may  be  remarked,  that  this  Command 
doili  not  discharge  all  ingravcings  and  paintings  in  religious  houses  or  books, 
seeing  it  is  evident  that 'in  the  very  Temple  there  was  plenty  of  these  ;  yea, 
and  the  very  Mercy-seat.itselfe  was  ovcrshaddowed  with  the  two  Cherubs; 
so  that  the  chief 'importance  of  this  Command  strikes  directly  against  any 
visible  representations  of  the  great  God,  and  the  worship  of  Him  by  such 
similitudes  or  any  creature. 

The  Third  obligcth  to  the  profoundest  reverence  of  the  name  of  God, 
and  to  reverence  things  and  persons  which  bear  any  relation  to  Him ;_  and, 
particularly,  that  we  should  so  stand  in  awe  of  His  Omniscience  and  intimate 
knowledge  of  our  inmost  thoughts  and  intentions,  as  never  to  avouch  Him 
to  men  as  witness  of  the  sincerity  of  our  outward  professions  when  really 
we  think  otherwise  ;  or  swear  by  Him  to  doe  that  which  we  never  intend  to 
perform. 

The  Fourth  seems  to  have  been  a  positive  Institution  from  the  begin 
ning,  as  was  Marriage,  the,  founded  on  ane  high  reason  ;  and  that  it  might 
have  bein  renewed  to  the  Childrein  of  Israel,  as  to  worship  and  serve  the 
great  Creator  of  the  Universe,  so  to  ascribe  to  Him,  and  Him  only,  that 
wonderful  work,  exclusive  of  all  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  who  so  far  might 
have  abused  their  deluded  votaries  as  to  make  them  believe  that  they  were 
the  creators  of  the  world.  I  also  think  that  by  this  Command  all  in  Cove 
nant  with  God  are  bound  to  observe  all  other  select  portions  of  time  which 
God  hath  enjoyned,  or  which  are  injoyned  by  lawful  authority ;  even  as  the 
Commands  of  the  Second  Table  comprehend  all  the  vertues  and  vices  that 
are  subordinate  to  the  grand  vertue  enjoyned  or  the  great  vice  condemned  in 
each  of  them. 

The  Fifth  obligeth  to  honour  parents.  Honour,  in  its  primary  notion, 
implies  not  only  reverence  but  also  obedience;  yea,  and  maintenance,  if 
circumstances  require  it.  This  Command  obligeth  to  all  duty  to  superiors 
of  all  sorts.  Dominion  is  peculiar  to  God,  and  is  no  otherwise  competent 
to  angel  or  man  but  as  it  is  derived  on  them  from  God ;  therfpr,  all  tres 
passes  on  duty  to  them  rebounds  on  God,  the  fountain  of  dominion. 


THE  LAW  AGAINST  IDOLATRY.  1G9 

The  Sixth  respecteth  the  body  of  our  neigbour,  and  comprehends  all 
injuries  that  may  be  done  wittingly  and  willingly  with  a  bad  intention.  Life 
belongs  to  God,  and  cannot  be  taken  away  without  His  order. 

The  Seventh  strikes  against  all  uncleanness  in  general,  particularly 
that  with  the  wife  of  the  neighbour,  she  being,  in  the  sense  of  the  Divine 
Law,  appropriated  to  the  husband  indeed,  by  a  hallowing  or  consecration. 

The  Eighth  respecteth  the  goods  of  our  neighbour,  these  being  that 
portion  which  God  hath  assigned  to  him ;  and  therefor  to  break  in  upon  it 
without  the  justest  claime  (in  which  case  it  is  not  his,  notwithstanding  of 
possession),  is  to  invade  the  order  of  God. 

The  Ninth  respecteth  the  fame  of  our  neighbour.  Our  neighbour  has  a 
title  as  such  to  our  love,  esteem,  and  assistance  ;  and  to  spoil  him  of  his 
good  name  is  to  rob  him  of  all  these  things  which  are  so  useful  and  neces 
sary.  It,  as  his  goods,  is  his  portion  from  God  ;  and  therfor  to  spoil  him  of 
that,  is  to  encroach  on  God's  assignments. 

The  Tenth  reacheth  the  very  heart,  and  rebukes  the  very  inward  desires 
after  that  which  belongeth  to  another ;  for  covetousness  is  a  plain  proof  of 
a  debauched  mind  and  will,  and  is  the  sin  itselfe  in  desire,  tho  not  in  fact. 

The  last  class  of  Laws  is  that  which  concerned  them  as  a  civil  politie, 
independent  of  and  remarkably  distinguished  from  all  other  civil  societies. 
All  interchange  of  mutual  offices  among  themselves  are  most  just  as  well  as 
prudential ;  but  here  it  is  needless  to  descend  to  particular  remarks.  Their 
Laws  concerning  their  intercourse  with  other  nations  have  some  singularities 
about  them,  agreeable  to  the  very  great  sacredness  of  their  Nation,  and  its 
separation  from  all  other  people  then  on  the  earth. 

Ther  was  one  Law,  that  of  the  Zealots,  which,  because  it  is  abused  by 
some  even  at  this  time,  deserves  some  consideration.  God  had  most  signally 
declared  against  Idolatry ;  insomuch  that  it,  committed  by  any  individual, 
inferred  a  judgment  on  the  whole  body  of  the  people.  This  sin  could  not  be 
expiated  otherwise  than  by  the  death  of  the  offender,  after  ane  ordinary  way. 
It's  true  God  could,  and  actually  did,  pardon  this  sin  upon  Repentance  ;  but 
then  He  extraordinarily  declared  His  will  upon  the  subject  by  His  Prophets. 
But  ordinarly  all  and  sundry  who  were  guilty  of  this  behoved  to  be  put  to 
death,  otherwise  the  penalty  of  the  Law  affected  the  whole  societie.  Wher- 
for,  God  priviledged  some  privat  persons,  without  waiting  the  common  form 
of  Law,  to  kill  idolaters.  Whence  some  Christians  have  settled  it  as  a 
maxime,  that  any  particular  person,  or  body  of  men,  may,  yea  and  are 
obleidged  in  duty,  to  destroy  Idolaters.  This  doctrine  hath  been  maintained 
and  practised  by  some  within  the  Roman  Communion,  by  the  Anabaptists 
in  Germany,  and  some  among  ourselves. 

Now,  in  the  first  place,  this  faculty  should  be  assumed  by  none  till  the 
fact  which  is  the  object  of  this  zeal  be  really,  and  by  common  suffrage, 
owned  and  confessed  to  be  the  very  Idolatrie  which  God  condemned  among 
the  Jewes,  otherwise  the  Zealots  not  only  susurp  the  Magistrate's  office,  but 
also  are  guilty  of  Murder. 

2dly.  If  this  Law  was  peculiar  to  the  Jew  (as  were  many  other  Laws), 
and  only  concerned  their  own  Nation,  then  all  their  other  Civil  Laws  are  as 
much  in  force  still  and  as  binding  as  this  ;  but  this  even  these  men  will  by 
no  means  allow. 

Sdly.  These  Zealots  insist  much  on  the  abrogation  of  many  of  the 
Jewish  Laws,  and  therefore  they  should  condescend  on  the  reasons  why  this 
should  subsist. 

VOL.  n.  y 


70  .WRONG  IDEAS  AS  TO  THE  JEWISH  LAWS. 

4tlily.  This  Law  seems  to  1)0  expressly  annulled  by  onr  Lord  when  he 
rebuked  the  Apostles  James  and  John,  for  calling  for  lire  from  Heaven  to 
destroy  the  inhospitable  and  malignant  Samaritans,  telling  them  that  the 
spirit  of  the  (iospel  was  designed  not  to  take  away  hut  to  save  men's  lives. 

Stilly.  The  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  is  not  of  this  world,  particularly  in 
this  respect,  that  His  servants  are  not  allowed  to  light  for  it.  The  weapons 
of  their  warfare  arc  not  carnal,  hut  spiritual,  and  yet  mighty  to  pull  down 
the  strongholds  of  the  Devil. 

Gtlily.  The  utmost  punishment  which  the  Church  of  Christ  is  allowed 
to  inllid'is  Excommunication,  w''h  is  a  thorough  deprivation  of  the  henefites 
purchased  by  Jesus,  and  a  consignation  of  the  delinquent  to  the  Devil. 
From  which'  reasons  it  appears  that  this  Doctrine  is  purely  Jewish,  and 
indeed  Antichristian. 

Here  occasion  may  be  taken  to  consider  another  subject,  which  hath 
been  the  ground  of  much  trouble  amongst  Protestants.  It  is  aiient  the 
abolishing  of  the  Jewish  Laws.  Some,  and  even  these  among  ourselves, 
allcdgc  that  all  the  Jewish  Laws  are  rescinded  by  Clod,  save  these  of  a  moral 
nature,  and  which  are  contained  in  the  Ten  Commandments.  Now  this 
seems  not  to  be  true,  seeing  it  is  plain  that  the  Apostle  S.  Paul  reasons  from 
the  obligations  under  the  Old  Testament  to  those  under  the  New,  as  in  the 
maintenance  of  Christ's  Ministers,  from  the  like  obligation  under  the  old. 
So  expressly  1  Cor.  ix.  ;  and  against  Christians  marrying  those  of  another 
Communion,  1  Cor.  vii.  1-1.  This  was  most  likely  to  be  done  by  the  Apostles, 
considering  their  education,  their  xeal  for  the  Law,  and  their  not  admitting 
innovations  without  evident  revelations.  There  is  no  tcstimonie  in  the  New 
Testament  that  all  Ceremonial  precepts  of  the  Law  were  to  lie  abrogated 
under  the  Gospel,  or  that  Christians  might  not  resume  these  Rites  if  they 
thought  them  edifying  in  their  circumstances.  The  great  thing  the  Apostles 
insist  on  with  respect  to  the  Mosaick  Law  is,  that  the  G entiles  were  to  be 
admitted  into  the  new  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  without  any  obligation  to 
observe  the  Law  of  Moses  as  imposed  on  the  Jewish  Nation,  and  without 
incorporating  themselves  into  the  particular  Nation  of  the  Jews  ;  and  conse 
quently  that  ther  was  no  necessity  of  Circumcision,  Baptism  being  sufficient 
to  admit  the  Gentile  Cornelius  into  the  Christian  Church  (Acts  x.  11) ;  that 
they  were  no  more  to  depend  upon  the  Temple  Sacrifices  and  Service,  or  to 
abstain  from  the  meats  forbidden  to  the  Jews,  never  to  the  Gentiles.  Who 
ever  will  read  attentively  the  reasonings  of  the  Apostle  S.  Paul  upon  this 
subject,  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans  and  (ialatiaus,  will  find  that  he  insists 
against  nothing  else  than  the  abrogation  of  such  things  in  the  Laws  of  Moses 
as  did  hinder  the  coalescence  of  both  Jew  and  Gentile  into  one  new  Church, 
founded  by  Jesus  Christ.  Circumcision,  Bloody  Sacrifice,  Dependance  011 
the  one  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  reckoning  Meats  forbidden  the  Jews  unlawful, 
the  Law  concerning  the  Zealots  already  mentioned;  in  short,  incorporating 
into  the  Jewish  Nation  ere  they  could  be  Members  of  the  Christian  Church, 
are  what  the  Apostle  disputes  against,  and  all  that's  implyed  in  that 
shakeing,  Heb.  xii.  20,  27  ;  for  the  observance  of  such  things  wherin  Jews 
and  Gentiles  did  not  differ,  could  not  have  made  any  breach  among  them. 

Inference  1.  From  all  which  it  is  plain,  that  all  things  will  still  obleige 
as  Laws  whyle  the  same  reason  continues  for  which  God  was  pleased  to 
impose  them. 

Inference  2nd.  That  the  Governours  of  the  Christian  Church  may 
impose  Rites  us,ed  by  the  Jews,  or  any  other  Rites  no  where  forbidden  by 


THE  CHRISTIAN  COVENANT.  171 

(loci,  and  winch  arc  of  anc  indifferent  nature,  antecedently  to  their  imposi 
tion;  and  which  derive  their  obligation  to  observance,  not  from  their  nature, 
but  from  the  authority  that  imposes  them,  provyded  they  be  for  order, 
deccncie,  and  edification. 


Our  first  parents  by  their  sin  haveing  forfeited  their  sublime  priviledges, 
particularly  the  Divine  Image  or  the  Spirit  which  dwelt  within  them,  and 
was  so  powerfully  assisting  to  their  reason  in  the  government  of  their  senses 
and  animal  appetites,  they  fell  under  the  dominion  of  these  fallen  Angels 
who  left  their  first  habitation;  whence  it  came  that  their  posterity  were 
under  all  these  disadvantages.  They,  antecedently  to  the  coming  of  Jesus 
Christ,  had  strong  bents  to  carnal  and  earthly  satisfactions,  and  placed  all 
their  happiness  in  these,  contrair  to  the  designs  of  their  Creator.  Their 
reason,  now  left  unassisted  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  could  no  more  manage  the 
animal  appetites  ;  yea,  became  so  debauched  by  them,  as  to  invent,  or  rather 
to  unbrace,  these  false  maxims  which  the  Devil  and  his  Angels  suggested  to 
them.  Their  will,  which  before  stood  in  anc  equal  ballance,  and  had  no 
byass  in  favours  of  carnal  satisfactions,  is  now  prejudiced,  and  hath  a  strong 
tendencie  to  earthly  and  sensual  gratifications,  together  with  anc  aversion  to 
God  and  to  that  felicity  which  is  spiritual.  In  the  other  world  their  undis 
ciplined  appetites  will  become  iixed  ;  and  yet  no  possibility  of  satisfying 
them.  They  will  become  indisposed  to  celestial  pleasures  and  conversation 
with  good  spirits,  and  have  cougruity  of  inclination  with  cursed  spirits, 
which  must  give  them  a  more  absolute  power  over  such  impure  souls.  This 
woful  deprivation,  together  with  their  tailing  in  with  the  Apostate  Angels, 
could  not  but  put  them  in  a  state  of  enmitie  with  God,  and  lay  them  open 
to  the  punishments  due  to  offending  creatures.  Besides,  the  sin  of  their  first 
parents  derived  pollution  and  obnoxiousness  to  punishment  on  the  posterities 
which  in  the  case  supposed  was  not  done  away  by  Repentance. 

Our  first  parents  and  their  posteritie  haveing  fallen  into  this  most 
wretched  state,  it  pleased  the  Eternal  Word,  the  Second  Person  of  the 
Glorious  Trinity,  the  increatcd  AYisdom  of  the  Father,  the  Son  of  God,  by 
Whom  the  worlds  were  made,  Whose  delight  Avas  with  the  sons  of  men,  and 
after  Whose  Image  the  first  man  was  made,  to  take  compassion  on  this  once 
favourite  but  now  disgraced  and  condemned  creature  ;  and  in  pursuance  of 
this  His  most  generous  and  exuberant  compassion,  to  treat  with  the  Father 
Almighty  in  favour  of  man.  Offended  Justice  behoved  to  be  satisfied,  and 
this  after  such  a  manner  as  that  the  honour  of  the  Divine  Authority  should 
be  preserved,  and  yet  man  be  terrified  from  venturing  on  sin.  Wherfor,  He 
covenants  with  the  Father  to  take  on  Him  the  compleat  human  nature,  to 
unite  it  personally  with  the  Divine,  and  substitute  Himselfe  with  greatest 
willingness  in  the  stead  of  man  ;  and  since  Heaven  had  decreed  Death  to  be 
the  punishment  of  sin,  and  that  without  shedding  of  blood  ther  could  be  no 
remission  therof,  therf'or  He  condescended  to  suffer  death  in  the  human 
nature,  personally  united  with  the  Divine  nature  of  Him  the  Eternal 
Wisdom  ;  which  death  of  the  human  nature,  so  dignified  by  this  union, 
should  be  a  perfect  satisfaction  to  the  Divine  justice,  exactly  preserve  the 
honour  of  the  Divine  authority,  and  of  all  other  was  to  be  the  most  terrible 
guard  against  relapsing  into  sin.  For  if  sin  could  not  otherwise  be  expiated 


172  THE  DIFFERENT  COVENANTS. 

than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,  then  it  must  be  of  a  very  malignant 
nature,  and  its  releasment  from  punishment  cannot  be  easily  procured. 
This  was  so  acceptable  to  God  the  Father,  that  He  agreed  His  Son,  Avhen 
God  and  Man  in  one  person,  should  become  the  Mediator  of  a  new  Covenant, 
perfeit  in  its  nature,  and  equal  with  the  world  in  its  duration. 

We  have  but  imperfeit  Accounts  of  the  first  Covenant  after  the  Fall. 
It's  plain  Cain  and  his  posteritie  were  passed  by ;  and  then  it  was  but  tem 
porary,  and  broke  up  by  the  Flood.  There  was  no  Covenant  wl  any  after 
the  Flood,  at  least  such  as  comprehended  posteritie,  till  God  called  Abraham. 
The  Covenant  with  him  and  his  seed  contained  promises  temporal  and 
spiritual ;  but  these  later  were  very  distant,  and  all  of  them  centered  in  the 
Messiah.  The  Covenant  with  Abraham  had  a  direct  aspect  on  that  which 
was  transacted  by  the  mediation  of  Moses  ;  and  it  again  had  an  aspect  to 
this  better,  more  perfeit,  and  everlasting  Covenant.  That  by  Moses  was  a 
shadow  in  comparison  of  this,  which  is  the  body  of  that  shadow ;  it  was  the 
type  of  this  antitype  ;  it  was  the  literal,  this  the  spiritual  Israel ;  it  was  the 
figure  of  the  evangelical,  as  this  again  is  that  of  the  celestial  state  ;  it  pro 
mised  temporary  favours  in  this  life,  and  their  most  pious  persons  could 
attain  no  more  happiness  in  the  after  life  than  what  is  found  in  the  separate 
intermediate  state.  This  overlooks  earthly  felicity,  and  that  of  the  inter 
mediate  state,  and  hath  in  prospect  the  most  sublime  and  consumated 
felicity  in  the  highest  heavens.  The  hope  of  the  Jew  reached  no  farther 
than  the  Kingdom  of  the  Messias.  The  Kingdom  of  the  Messias  being  come, 
comforts  its  subjects  with  the  hope  of  the  most  glorious  immortality.  The 
Jewish  Covenant  was  dark;  its  spiritual  things  were  hid  under  the  veil  of 
burdensome  Ceremonies  and  costly  Sacrifices  ;  the  light  they  had  was  by 
their  Prophets,  concerning  the  Dispensation  of  the  Messias,  Wh  was  to  come. 
This  is  easie,  clear,  and  bright,  and  the  full  accomplishment  of  all  foretold 
by  the  Prophets.  The  Jew  had  no  more  than  the  transient  visits  of  the 
Spirit,  ceasing  [x<>i~.hi<i,  perhaps]  sometimes  their  Priests,  Prophets,  and 
Kings.  This  promiseth  the  Spirit  to  dwell  within  every  Member  of  the 
Christian  Church,  as  an  abiding  and  living  Principle.  By  these  hints  we 
may  come  to  have  some  view  of  the  vast  honour  and  happiness  which 
redounds  to  those  who  are  within  the  Christian  Covenant,  and  its  far  greater 
excellencies  than  any  of  the  former.  And  now  we  may  consider  the  terms 
stipulated  between  God  and  men  by  virtue  of  this  most  august  Covenant. 

On  God's  part,  the  first  thing  stipulated  is  Pardon  of  Sin  by  Baptism. 

It  is  already  observed  that  Jesus  Christ,  by  His  generous  undertakeiug  for 
man,  and  voluntary  substitution  of  Himselfe  in  man's  stead,  did  merit,  upon 
the  actual  discharge  of  His  engagement,  to  be  the  Mediator  of  this  new,  good, 
and  everlasting  Covenant  between  God  and  man.  In  this  quality  he  stipulates 
between  them,"  that  God  should  vouchsafe  the  free  pardon  of  the  sins  of  all 
those  that  enter  into  this  Covenant,  on  condition  of  their  repentance.  This 
pardon  is  the  same  with  Justification,  which  is  a  term  of  Law  signifying  the 
guilty  person's  absolution  from  the  penalty  of  the  Law  due  to  the  crimes  com 
mitted  ;  and  Repentance,  the  condition  on  man's  part,  in  the  original  signifies 
a  change  of  mind,  even  a  conversion  of  the  thought  and  will  from  error  and 
sin  unto  God  and  goodness.  Hence  it  is  plain  that,  antecedently  to  Bap 
tism  (the  mysterie  of  initiation,  or  entering  into  this  Covenant),  all  these  of 
age  were  obliged  to  renounce  the  Devil,  their  former  master,  and  voluntarly 
to  list  themselves  in  the  service  of  God  and  His  Christ ;  to  forgoe  their 


THE  GIFTS  OF  BAPTISM.  173 

former  bad  principles  and  maxims,  and  embrace  the  doctrines  of  God  taught 
by  Christ  and  His  Spirit  in  His  Apostles  and  Prophets  ;  and  then  no  more 
to  act  by  the  false  maxims  of  the  world  or  the  flesh,  but  by  the  Laws  and 
example  of  Jesus  Christ.  On  the  sincere  profession  of  all  this,  persons  of 
age  were  Baptised  ;  and  this  is  Kepentance  in  the  true  and  proper  sense  of 
that  term.  It  is  true  that  in  all  ages  too  many  have  sinned  after  Baptism, 
and  that  wilfully,  heinously,  and  habitually ;  and  such  is  the  exuberant 
goodness  of  God,  in  and  by  that  Covenant,  that  He  admits  them  to  pardon 
on  a  second  repentance.  Such  as  are  admitted  by  Baptism  to  the  priviledges 
of  this  Covenant,  are  said  to  be  come  to  the  City  of  God,  to  the  Heavenly 
Jerusalem,  &c.  (Hob.  xii.  22,  23.)  And  in  the  Book  of  the  Revelations,  the 
Society  made  up  of  Members  so  admitted,  or  the  Church,  is  called  the  New 
Jerusalem,  descending  from  Heaven  (Revel,  xxi.  10).  The  Citizens  of  this 
Kingdom  are  said  to  have  come  to  the  Mount  Zion  that  is  above,  &c. 

The  term  Justification  is  much  used  by  S.  Paul  in  his  dispxites  with  the 
Judaizing  Christians,  signifying,  as  is  said,  remission  of  sin,  or  anc  absolu 
tion  from  the  penalty  of  the  Law,  and  consequently  a  restoration  to  the 
favour  of  the  Sovereign,  and  to  the  priviledges  of  a  dutiful  subject,  a  title  to 
which  the  criminal  was  supposed  to  have  forfeited. 

The  next  thing  promised  by  God  is  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  to  abide 
and  dwell  with  every  member  of  the  Society,  as  a  living  and  assisting  prin 
ciple.  The  giving  of  the  Holy  Spirit  thus  to  dwell  within  us,  is  that  by 
which  we  are  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  ;  that  Avhich  constitutes 
our  new  birth  and  denominates  us  regenerate,  or  born  again,  or  sanctified. 
It's  true  there  is  a  relative  and  external  sanctification  beside  the  real  one. 
All  circumcised  Jews  are  such,  and  all  the  Members  of  the  Church  arc  called 
.such  indiscriminately.  The  Apostle  calls  the  Corinthians  Saints,  thn  after 
ward,  on  the  account  of  their  divisions,  he  calls  them  carnal.  But  by  this 
inhabitation  of  the  Spirit  we  are  truly  sanctified,  after  a  true  and  proper 
manner.  This  Spirit  is  said  to  be  given  to  Christ  (the  head  of  that  body 
which  is  the  Church)  above  measure.  He  communicates  this  to  all  His 
mystical  members,  as  the  vital  spirits  flow  from  the  head  of  the  natural  body 
to  each  member ;  or  as  the  nourishing  juice  from  the  root  of  the  tree  to  its 
branches.  All  acts  of  Christian  pietic  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit :  such  as 
are  unfruitful  in  these  are  dead  members,  or  withered  branches.  It  is  this 
Divine  Spirit  which  unites  us  to  Christ  the  Head,  and  to  one  another,  there 
for  called  the  unity  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  He  that  denominates  us  the  Sons  of 
God,  and  states  us  the  adopted  children  of  His  family.  It  is  It  which  so 
qualifies  our  Prayers  that  they  become  acceptable  ;  yea,  and  He,  the  Spirit, 
makes  intercession  for  us  to  Him  Who  knows  the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  His 
gifts  and  operations  are  of  two  sorts.  One,  of  those  freely  given — t/ratia  yratix 
ilftta,  as  the  Schools  speak  ;  and  such  were  the  miraculous  powers  shed 
abroad  on  the  Apostles  and  the  Primitive  Christians,  all  designed  for  the 
increase  and  edification  of  the  Body,  the  Church  ;  for  the  conversion  of  those 
without  and  the  improvement  of  those  within.  His  other  sort  of  gifts  are 
these  which  render  us  good  and  Aviso.  This  He  doth  by  presenting  pious 
thoughts  to  our  minds,  and  setting  them  in  such  a  light  that  our  will  may 
take  in  with  them ;  and  they  are  not  resisted  without  inward  reluctancie, 
and  a  kind  of  violence  done  to  our  minds.  The  Spirit  is  the  seal  by  which 
we  ourselves,  and  those  who  see  our  good  works,  know  us  to  be  the  children 
of  God.  He  is  the  Author  of  all  inward  consolation  ;  hence  it  is  called  the 


171  BENEFITS  OF  Till-:  COVENANT  OF  GUACE. 

joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     He  is  also  that  Earnest  of  Heaven,  that  Pledge  by 
which  we  are  assured  of  it  ;  hence  called  the  Earnest  of  the  Spirit. 

Thirdly.  Pardon  of  sins  of  relapse  after  Baptism,  mentioned  before. 
These  are  of  two  kinds:  1st.  Such  as  are  the  effects  of  weakness,  surprise, 
or  inadvertency,  and  in  the  commission  of  which  the  will  is  not  thoroughly 
concurring.  2d.  Are  deliberate,  premeditate  sins,  which  one  commits 
wittingly  and  willingly.  The  Ancient  Church  distinguished  them  into 
venial  and  mortal.  According  to  S.  John  there  is  a  sin  unto  death,  and  a 
bin  not  unto  death.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  provoked  to  depart  by  the  wilful 
sins,  but  not  by  the  other,  unless  they  grow  into  habits.  The  wilful  sin  lays 
open  to  Excommunication,  which  implies  a  total  deprivation  of  the  privi- 
Icdges  and  benefits  of  the  Societie  ;  the  other  obleigcs  to  penitence,  but  does 
not  infer  anc  obnoxionsncss  to  the  dire  penalty  of  Excommunication. 
Nevertheless,  such  is  the  grace  of  God  in  this  new  Covenant,  that  all  sorts 
and  sizes  of  sins  are  forgiven  upon  penitence,  and  the  sincerity  of  it  duly 
signified  (Heb.  viii.  H,  &c. ;  1  Jo.  i.  1  ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  :->;-j.  ;>!). 

•1.  The  fourth  thing  stipulated  is — Acceptance  of  our  imperfeit  duty  as 
if  it  was  perfeit,  on  supposition  of  sincerity.  God  is  not  obliged,  in  strict 
equity,  to  accept  of  any  performance  but  what  meets  exactly  with  the  Law, 
far  less  to  reward  it  ;  but  such  as  are  interested  in  this  Covenant  have  a 
title  both  to  acceptance  and  reward,  on  supposition  of  a  willing  mind,  a 
sincere  endeavour,  and  ane  upright  intention.  Voluntary  defects  of  these 
is  hypocrisie  ;  but  when  our  will  doth  not  exactly  concur  with  the  will  of 
God,  through  involuntary  weakness,  then  God  accepts  according  to  what  a 
man  hath,  and  not  according  to  what  he  hath  not. 

5.  God,  by  this  great  and  everlasting  Covenant  through  Jesus  Christ, 
hath  bound  llimselfe  by  promise  to  bestow  on  those  interested  in  it  ever 
lasting  honour  and  happieness,  and  that  on  the  soul  and  body,  reunited  in 
the  third  Heavens.  This  is  a  reward  wholly  supernatural,  due  neither  to 
our  nature  or  our  works.  A  pious  or  a  virtuous  heathen  may  be  rewarded 
with  temporal  blessings.  He  may  also  be  favoured  with  that  happieness  in 
the  separate  state  which  results  from  a  victory  over  the  animal  passions,  and 
a  sense  of  liaveing  done  good  in  this  life  ;  and  if  he  hath  not  resisted  the 
Gospel,  but  acted  according  to  his  light,  then  it  is  reasonable  and  charitable 
to  think  that  he  shall  find  a  reward  proportioned  to  his  virtue.  But  the 
glorious  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the  exaltation  of  both,  thus  reunited, 
to  the  third  Heavens,  that  place  where  the  glory  of  God  is  most  conspicu 
ously  manifested,  and  ther  to  enjoy  the  infinitly  perfeit  Being  and  His 
Christ  in  the  most  intimate  manner,  is  peculiar  to  Christians — a  reward  by 
no  means  due  to  the  utmost  pietie,  or  competent  to  our  rational  nature,  but 
is  purely  owing  to  the  grace  and  generous  favour  of  God,  purchased  by  the 
merits  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

These  are  the  priviledges  and  benefits  which  God  hath  promised  by  the 
Covenant  of  Grace,  in  consideration  of  the  merits  of  Jesus. 

Now,  as  to  the  conditions  required  at  our  hands,  and  to  which  we  bind 
ourselves  by  our  admission  into  that  Covenant. 

1.  The  first  of  these  stipulated  on  man's  part,  and  which  is  fundamental 
to  all  the  rest,  is  Faith.  "Whosoever  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved."  Faith  in  the  Scriptures  signifies  three  things — (1)  The  Doctrine  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  even  these  sublime  truths  which  He  taught,  the  Laws 
He  enjoyned,  the  promises  He  made,  and  the  punishments  He  hath  threatned. 


FAITH  AND  REPENTANCE.  175 

(2)  That  act  of  our  minds  by  which  we  thoroughly  assent  unto  and  firmly 
believe  all  these  propositions  ;  and  this  because  the  God  of  infinite  and 
essential  truth  hath  revealed  and  declared  them,  and  doth  peremptory 
require  us  to  believe  them  under  the  highest  pains.  (3)  Faith  often  signifies 
the  state  of  the  Gospel,  as  it  stands  distinguished  from  the  state  of  the 
Heathen  and  Jew. 

Faith,  in  the  first  and  second  sense — that  is,  the  knowledge  of  the 
sublime  doctrine,  preceps,  promises,  and  tlireatnings  of  the  Gospel,  together 
with  a  full  and  hearty  belief  and  assent  to  all  and  each  of  these  propositions 
— is  absolutely  necessary  ere  any  person  of  age  can  be  received  by  Baptism 
into  the  Christian  Covenant.  This  Faith  was  the  effect  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
preventing  grace  in  the  beginning  of  Christianity ;  and,  being  absolutely 
necessary,  is  still  required,  antecedently  to  admission  to  the  Covenant. 
'•  None  cometh  to  me  (saith  our  Lord)  unless  the  Father  which  sent  me 
draw  him."  And  then,  after  any  one  was  baptised,  they  were  said  to  be  in 
the  Faith,  and  were  denominated  faithful ;  and  ever  therafter,  to  the  end  of 
their  life,  were  obliged  to  abide  in  the  Faith,  till  their  very  death.  Renounc 
ing  the  Faith  in  general,  or  any  article  of  it,  was  the  sin  of  Apostasie,  which 
was  punishable  by  Excommunication,  the  which  deprived  the  excommuni 
cate  of  all  the  benefits  purchased  by  Jesus,  and  consigned  the  person  to  the 
Devil.  Thus  Faith  behoved  to  lie  equal  in  length  with  the  life  ;  and  the 
Christian,  at  his  admission  into  the  new  Covenant  by  Baptism,  is  obliged  to 
own  the  Christian  Doctrine  by  a  publick  avowed  profession,  and  to  suffer 
martyrdome  in  the  strictest  sense  of  that  word ;  that  is,  losing  all  that  is 
dear  to  us,  the  life  of  the  body  not  excepted,  ere  we  renounce  the  Faith  or 
any  part  of  it. 

*2.  The  next  condition  of  the  Covenant  of  Grace  is  Repentance.  "Wher 
true  Faith  is,  this  will  follow  of  course,  as  a  practical  inference  from  its 
premisses.  Now,  Repentance,  in  its  primary  sense,  doth  signifie  a  change 
of  mind,  of  thoughts,  desires,  and  intentions  ;  and  when  the  interior  habit 
of  the  mind  is  changed,  the  outward  reformation  of  the  life  will  issue  from 
it,  as  good  fruits  from  a  good  tree.  This  Repentance  was  required,  in  the 
beginning  of  Christianity,  of  all  those  persons  of  age  who  were  to  be  Bap 
tised  ;  not  that  it  was  compleat  in  its  kind  till  they  received  the  Baptismal 
Spirit,  but  they  behoved  to  have  it  in  view,  that  is,  in  firm  purpose  and 
resolution,  and  this  qualified  for  entrance  into  the  Covenant  by  Baptism. 
Nor  had  Penitents  a  title  to,  or  was  Justification  (that  is,  remission  of  sins) 
actually  applied  till  Baptism.  Hence  were  they  charged  to  Repent  and  be 
Baptised,  that  they  might  receive  Remission  of  Sins  (Acts  ii.  38). 

This  Repentance,  at  first  initiation  into  the  Covenant  of  Grace,  or  into 
the  Church  or  Christian  state,  is  the  Repentance  which  is  primarly  intended 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  New  Testament.  Now,  I  said  before  that  such  is 
the  exuberant  grace  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  that  He  doth  promise 
pardon  to  such  as  fall  into  sin  after  Baptism,  if  they  repent  of  the  evil  of 
their  ways,  and  turn  unto  God  after  the  way  which  He  hath  appointed. 
Such  was  that  of  S.  Peter,  of  the  Corinthians,  of  the  incestuous  person  in 
particular,  and  of  the  Churches  in  the  Revelations  ;  and  generally  of  all 
lapsers  into  deliberate  and  habitual  sins  after  Baptism.  This  Repentance  is 
occasioned  by  motives  of  fear,  and  these  of  hope  ;  but  the  great  effect  of  it 
is  Contrition,  or  a  hearty  sorrow  for  having  offended  God,  and  then  a 
thorough  resignation  to  Him,  to  love  His  excellencie  and  to  do  His  will. 


170  MORTIFICATION  AND  CHARITY. 

3.  Mortification.     To  this  we  are  bound  by  Baptism,  we  then  being 
buried  with  Christ.     The  Devil,  the  World,  and  the  Flesh  are  supposed  to 
be  the  masters  we  serve  antecedently  to  our  engagement  in  the  Christian 
Covenant.     These,  therfor,  must  be  renounced  when  we  enlist  ourselves 
under  the  banner  of  Jesus,  and  take  allegiance  to  Him.     Ther  is  nothing 
more  plain  in  the  New  Testament  than  that  the  Devil  is  the  god  of  this 
world  ;    and  the  great  thing  he  proposes  on  men  is  to  inspire  them  with 
inordinate   and  immoderate  desires  after  carnal  and  earthly  satisfactions. 
Hence  the  first  Pastors  of  the  Church  exorcised  the  evil  spirit  out  of  those 
whom  they  were  to  Baptize,  and  obliged  them  who  were  of  age  to  strict  dis 
cipline,  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  a  victory  over  the  flesh  and  the  world, 
and  this  ere  they  were  Baptized.     Mortification  is  therefor  then  attained 
when  reason  hath  obtained  a  masterly  command  over  the  carnal  and  earthly 
desires  and  bents;    and   this   from   Christian  motives,   and  with  Christian 
views  and  intentions.     I  say  with  Christian  intentions,  otherwise  it  comes 
to  no  more  than  a  Philosopher's  severitie,  which  may  meet  with  a  propor 
tional  reward  if  the  persons  were  such  as  were  under  a  moral  incapacity  of 
knowing  the  Gospel.      Such  were  the  Philosophers  of  old,  and  the  Bramans 
and  Dervises  at  this  time.     But  if  these  austerities  be  of  such  as  may  and 
actually  knoAV  the  Gospel,  and  yet  do  not  intend  them  to  the  end  it  proposes, 
then  their  Mortification  hath  no  title  as  such  to  the  benefits  purchased  by 
Jesus,   because   in   the   case   supposed   Jesus   intends   one   thing  and   they 
another  (Colons,  ii.  18,  &c.) 

4.  Charity.     This  comprehends  the  love  of  Clod  and  of  men.     Charity, 
as  it  signifies  the  love  of  God,  implies  two  things — (1)  That  He  should  be 
the  great  object  of  our  esteem  and  love,  and  that  all  other  things  should  be 
beloved  in  subordination  to  Him;  that  is,  with  these  degrees  of  esteem  and 
love  which  He  permits  and  approves  of.     Nothing  more  clear  than  that  He 
makes  His  creatures  the  instruments  of  our  support  and  comfort.     These, 
therfor,  whether  reasonable  or  unreasonable,  are  by  His  order  the  object  of 
our  love  and  regard.     If  reasonable,  we  owe  them,  by  the  order  of  God,  the 
returns  of  gratitude  ;   if  unreasonable,  whether  animate  or  inanimate,  they 
call  for  our  care  and  Industrie,  both  which  imply  love.     Thus,  a  temporal 
degree  of  love  to  the  creatures,  in  subordination  to  God,  that  is,  for  His  sake 
and  in  obedience  to  His  command,  is  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  the 
love  of  Him.     Neither  is  a  just  regard  to  our  temporal  and  eternal  happie- 
ness  in  any  way  inconsistent  with  the  love  of  God.     As  for  our  temporal 
happieness,  it  never  must  be  purchased  at  the  rate  of  any  known  sin.     It 
must  be  chearfully  offered  up  as  a  sacrifice  to  God  when  He  requires  it.     It 
must  frankly  be  parted  with,  either  for  His  sake  or  in  submission  to  His 
will.     As  for  the  spiritual  and  eternal  happiness,  it  is  what  He  requires  us 
to  pursue.      Our  Lord  Himself  is   said  to  have   endured  the   Cross  and 
despised  the  shame  for  the  glory  that  was  set  before  Him.     The  love  of  God 
and  the  happiness  of  a  Christian  are  inseparable,  and  He  standeth  in  no 
need  of  our  love  ;  therfor  wills  us  to  love  Him,  that  we  may  find  a  consum 
mate  felicity  in  that  love  of  Him.     Moreover,  God  hath  implanted  in  all 
rational  creatures,  Angels  and  men,  ane  invincible  desire  of  happiness,  and 
ane  equal  aversion  to  miserie.     This  is  what  makes  them  the  subjects  of  the 
Divine  Government,  and  without  this  I  cannot  conceive  of  their  obligation 
to  dependance.     It  is  scarcely  possible  to  conceive  of  God,  but  He  must  be 
supposed  good ;  that  it  is  in  Him  which  commends  Him  to  our  love  ;  and 


DIVINE  CHARITY.  177 

that  attribute  of  His  goodness  cannot  be  conceived  without  a  regard  to 
ourselves.  Praise  and  Prayer  are  acts  of  Religious  Worship,  and  a  disinter 
ested  love  of  God,  pretended  to  by  some,  supersedes  both,  at  least  the  last. 
In  truth,  Prayer  on  this  supposition  is  impertinent ;  and  as  to  Praise,  He 
may  be  extolled  and  loved  on  the  account  of  His  other  perfections  ;  but  not 
(consequentially)  as  He  is  good  and  beneficent,  with  regard  at  least  to  this 
disinterested  lover.  Yet  tho  it  is  scarce  conceivable  how  God  can  be  loved 
so  very  disinterestedly,  as  is  affirmed  by  some  pious  persons— goodness,  and 
that  as  it  respecteth  the  votarie  in  particular,  being  one,  if  not  the  chief, 
motive  of  Charity — yet  certainly  the  love  of  God  is  the  noblest  and  highest 
virtue.  This  on  the  account  of  His  infinite  excellency,  it  being  impossible 
(acting  rationally)  not  to  love  that  which  is  most  perfeit,  or  which  is  appre 
hended  as  such.  It  argues  a  strong  perverseuess  of  nature  not  to  love  that 
which  is  beneficent  in  the  highest  degree,  particularly  to  the  beneficiary. 
Charity  should  be  so  much  cultivated,  that  all  created  things  should  be 
despised,  in  comparison  at  least,  so  farr  as  that  it  supcrat  all  inordinate  and 
immoderate  affections ;  that  is,  that  the  love  may  not  fix  on  any  forbidden 
object,  or  bend  Avith  excessive  vehemencie  toward  that  object  which  God 
allowes  us  to  love  in  a  proportionate  and  inferior  degree.  Charity  should  be 
so  predominant  in  the  mind  as  that  evil  should  be  refrained,  and  all  good 
should  be  done  from  this  noble  motive  of  the  love  of  God,  and  not  chiefly 
from  subordinate  and  selfish  considerations.  It  should  so  farr  have  the 
ascendant  as  to  determine  the  choice,  even  in  things  that  not  only  are  incon 
sistent  with,  but  contrary  to  our  interest,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  case 
of  all  such  as  suffer  for  Righteousness'  sake.  This  Charity  should  the  rather 
be  laboured  after,  because  it  is  the  grand  business  of  Saints  and  Angels  in 
Heaven  ;  and,  therfor,  without  it  ther  cannot  be  any  felicity  in  the  other 
world,  seeing  otherwise  our  mind  can  never  be  in  any  disposition  for  fixing 
its  delight  on  the  Supreme  Good,  God  blessed  for  ever. 

The  fruit  of  this  Charity  or  Divine  Love  is  obedience  to  all  God's 
Commands,  without  exception  or  reserve,  tho  it  should  bear  never  so  hard 
on  our  carnal  and  earthly  desires.  It  should  be  voluntary  ;  and  such  it  will 
be  if  the  love  of  God  hath  the  ascendant.  Obedience  also  must  have  the 
publick  good  chiefly  in  view.  This  I  take  to  be  the  moral  perfection  so 
much  insisted  on  in  the  New  Testament.  This  regard  to  the  publick  is  the 
closest  imitation  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  His  Father  in  Heaven  ;  and  is  very 
far  preferable  to  a  solitary  abstracted  pietie,  which,  how  exalted  soever,  is 
more  selfish  and  less  beneficent  than  the  study  of  the  public  good.  And  this 
leads  me  to  the  second  sort  of  Charity,  which  is  that  to  men. 

This  is  twofold — (1)  Universal  Benevolence,  that  respecteth  all  men  as 
such,  without  distinction,  and  should  be  extended  to  all  men,  our  temporal 
and  spiritual  enemies  not  excepted.  This  love  of  men  was  that  generous 
principle  which  so  fully  abounded  in  our  Lord,  and  moved  Him  to  undertake 
and  achieve  that  grand  work  of  our  Redemption.  It  therfor  must  dwell  in 
the  breast  of  every  Christian,  and  express  itself  on  all  occasions.  We  should 
therfor  study  the  conversion,  not  the  destruction  of  God's  or  our  enemies, 
and  nothing  should  provoke  us  to  do  them  any  harm,  save  incorrigible 
obstinacie  ;  yea,  and  even  then  none  should  execute  vengeance,  save  the 
Magistrate  who  personates  God. 

(2)  The  other,  Charity  to  men,  is  that  which  is  among  the  Members  of 
the  Church — those  who  have  one  Faith,  one  Baptism,  one  Lord,  one  Spirit, 

VOL.  II.  2 


ITS  CHARITY  TO  MEN. 

one  Hope  ;  who  are  linked  together  by  the  sacred  cords  of  spiritual  rela 
tion.  This  is  that  Charity  which  is  chiefly  insisted  on  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  the  New  Testament.  In  truth,  not  that  latitudinarian,  novel  Charity 
so  much  abused  at  this  time,  to  the  utter  breach  of  Christian  unity  and  the 
subversion  of  the  beauty  of  order.  He  who  will  be  at  pains  to  attend  to  the 
Revelations  of  the  Gospel  on  this  subject,  will  find  that  this  is  the  great 
thing  laboured  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  especially  by  the  Apostles  S.  John  and 
8.  Paul.  These  who  are  without  the  Church  may  lay  claim  to  the  benevo 
lence  already  mentioned,  but  not  to  this  Charity,  properly  so  called.  This 
is  that  which  is  so  much  celebrated  1  Cor.  xiii.,  and  in  the  First  Epistle  of 
S.  John.  In  truth,  it's  it  which  corresponds  to  and  effectually  disposes  for 
that  great  branch  of  perfection  and  blessedness  that  is  in  Heaven  among 
Saints  and  Angels.  The  chief  design  of  this  Charity  is  edification  ;  that  is, 
the  improvement  of  one  another  in  knowledge  and  pictie,  even  as  all  the 
members  of  the  body  conspire  in  promoting  the  health  and  strength  of  the 
whole. 

This  Charity,  the  bond  of  perfectiress,  is  violated  by  want  of  sympathie 
with  the  fellow-members  of  the  Church,  either  in  good  or  bad  circumstances; 
for,  saith  the  Apostle,  if  one  member  rejoice,  so  should  the  rest ;  if  any 
suffer,  the  rest  should  also.  It  is  also  violated  by  withholding  supply, 
comfort,  and  assistance  from  suffering  members  of  the  same  body,  when  it 
'is  in  our  power  to  afford  these.  Thus  at  the  Day  of  Judgment  our  Lord 
interprets  all  these  omissions  as  neglects  of  Himself,  who  is  the  Head  of  the 
Mystical  Body.  It  is  violated  by  factious  maintenance  of  groundless 
opinions.  This  plainly  is  censured  in  the  Christian  Corinthians,  insomuch 
that  the  Apostle  calls  them  carnal  on  the  account  of  their  divisions.  This 
Charity  is  yet  more  signally  violated  by  resisting  and  separating  from 
spiritual  governors  ;  hence  such  are  likened  to  Jannes  and  Jambres,  the 
Egyptian  Magicians,  who  withstood  Moses  (2  Tim.  iii.  G,  8),  to  Cain  and 
Ko'rch  (S.  Jude,  11) ;  and  they  who  have  no  fellowship  or  communion  with 
the  Apostles,  and  consequently  with  their  Successors,  are  said  to  have  no 
fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  but  to  be  in  darkness,  to  lye  and 
not  to  do  the  truth  (1  S.  Jo.  i.  8,  0).  This  yet  more  fully  appears  from  the 
First  Epistle  of  the  Apostolical  S.  Clemens  to  the  Corinthians. 

5th.  The  next  condition  of  the  Covenant  of  Grace,  is  the  devout  obser 
vance  of  the  primitive  Institutions  of  the  Christian  Religion.  These  are  the 
Ministrie,  the  Sacraments,  and  the  Ordinances. 

(1)  The  Ministrie.  It  is  plain  from  what  hath  been  already  observed, 
that  since  the  apostasy  of  our  first  parents,  God  hath  positively  instituted 
and  revealed  that  Religion  to  men  Avhich  is  acceptable  to  Him  ;  so  that  tlier  is 
no  trusting  (in  order  to  the  favour  of  God)  to  Natural  Religion,  or  that  which 
we  conceit  to  be  right  and  rational,  even  tho  approved  by  natural  conscience. 
The  Will  of  God  must  be  the  Rule,  and  its  uniform,  constant,  and  universal 
prescribing  Law  to  all  men,  and  not  allowing  every  one  to  go  by  his  private 
spirit.  That  conscience  is  but  deluded  which  inquires  not  after  the  will  of 
God,  and  frames  not  its  practice  to  the  common  standard  of  it,  but  trusts  to 
its  own  private  and  personal  conceits.  One  may  as  well,  and  with  infinitely 
more  safety,  trust  to  his  own  particular  apprehensions  with  respect  to  civil 
right  and  wrong,  to  the  neglect  of  the  Laws  of  that  civil  society  of  which  he 
is  a  member,  as  to  his  own  notions  in  Religion.  Since,  then,  God  hath 
revealed  and  instituted  Religion ;  and  since  this  Religion  hath  instituted  a 


MINISTERS  AND  THEIR  POWERS.  179 

Ministry,  therfor  this  Ministry  must  be  religiously  observed.  It's  plain  our 
Lord  did  commissionate  His  Apostles,  and  promised  to  be  with  them  to  the 
end  of  the  world  ;  therfor  never  to  expire,  but  be  perpetual.  It's  plain  that 
our  Lord  was  sent  or  cominissionated  by  His  Father,  and  the  like  authority 
He  derived  on  His  Apostles  :  "As  my  Eather  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you," 
&c.  (S.  Jo.  xx.  21,  &c.)  This  commission  the  Apostles  exerted  by  ordaining, 
authorizing,  or  sending  others  ;  and  so  on  still  to  this  present  time,  and 
henceforth  to  the  end  of  the  Avorld,  even  as  light  kindleth  fresh  successive 
lights.  This  could  not  be  otherwise,  considering  that  according  to  the 
Prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  concerning  the  Messias,  and  the  many  and 
luculent  Revelations  of  the  New  Testament,  Christ  was  to  bo  a  King,  "Who 
should  found  a  Society  and  State,  Himself  being  King  and  Governor  of  it  ; 
consequently  He  behoved  to  have  Officers  to  act  in  His  name,  whose  sen 
tences,  agreeably  to  His  Law,  He  Avould  ratitie  in  Heaven,  and  without 
whose  interposition  no  legal  deeds  could  be  of  any  validity.  This  should  be 
diligently  considered  ;  for  all  those  who  go  on  the  latitudinarian  novel 
ground  consider  our  Holy  Religion,  not  as  it  is  indeed  a  Society,  and  that 
infinitely  transcending  in  real  excellency  all  the  Kingdoms  and  Common 
wealths  in  the  world,  both  on  the  account  of  its  glorious  Sovereign,  and  of 
its  object,  which  is  the  rectitude  of  our  minds  and  our  peace  with  God  in 
this  life,  and  our  everlasting  felicity  in  the  other;  whereas  our  civil  societies 
have  at  best  but  weak,  corrupt  men  for  their  supreme  governours,  and  a 
sorry  fugitive  temporal  happiness  for  their  object.  Not  only  hath  God 
revealed  and  instituted  our  Holy  Religion ;  not  only  is  Jesus  Christ  a  King 
and  Founder  of  ane  excellent  Society,  and  as  such  hath  ordained  and 
authorized  men  to  act  in  His  name  ;  but  He  hath  entered  into  Covenant 
with  us,  by  which  He  hath  stipulated  for  favours  to  be  conferred  on  His 
part,  and  men  are  bound  to  terms  and  conditions  on  their  part.  In  this 
Covenant  stands  all  our  security,  insomuch  that  we  can  have  no  assurance 
either  of  grace  or  glory  without  an  interest  in  it  ;  no  more  than  a  charitable 
presumption,  founded  on  the  uncovenaiitcd  goodness  of  God.  Now  every 
Covenant  must  have  Seals,  without  which  it  is  not  of  any  legal  validity. 
These  Seals  cannot  be  appended  but  by  commissioned  persons,  and  these 
arc  the  Ministers  of  Religion.  Moreover,  we  having  to  do  with  anc  invisible 
King,  it  is  rational  that  His  visible  Ministers  should  be  judges  of  the  quali 
fications  of  those  who  are  to  be  admitted  into  this  Covenant ;  and  when 
entered,  who  arc  worthy  to  be  kccped  within  it,  or  who  have  forfeited  the 
benefits  of  it.  This  is  the  import  of  the  "Keys  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven 
that  are  given  to  them,  and  of  their  faculty  of  retaining  or  remitting  sins. 
Finally,  all  within  the  Christian  Covenant  arc  obliged  to  retain  unto  and 
live  in  communion  with  the  Ministers  of  Religion.  S.  John,  in  the  place 
above  cited,  professeth  that  his  communion  was  with  the  Eather  and  the 
Son  ;  consequently  that  they  Averc  in  the  light ;  consequently  the  Schis- 
maticks  of  these  times  were  in  darkness.  What  was  obliging  on  the  Chris 
tians  of  these  times,  continues  to  be  obligatory  on  their  successors  to  the 
end  of  the  world.  Nothing  can  excuse  separation  from  the  authorized 
Minister  of  Religion,  save  Heresie  and  Schism ;  and  this  imposed  as  terms 
and  conditions  of  Communion ;  110  personal  immorality  or  negligence — for 
this  they  are  to  answer  to  their  great  Constituent.  Still  men  should  dis 
tinguish  between  the  office  and  the  personal  qualities  of  the  officer.  The 
legal  validity  of  their  deeds  (in  which  alone  the  people  are  concerned)  depends 


180  HOLY  BAPTISM. 

on  their  commission,  not  on  their  personal  endowments  or  moral  Dualities. 
The  Ministers  of  Religion  are  as  principles  of  unity  by  which  the  people  are 
knit  to  Christ  the  Head.  This  is  the  import  of  our  Lord's  saying,  "  He  that 
heareth  you,  heareth  me  ;  and  he  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  me  ;  and  he 
that  despiseth  me,  despiseth  him  that  sent  me" — a  remarkable  gradation, 
and  founded  in  order,  and  that  of  persons,  according  to  the  principles  of 
government  in  general.  This  should  be  seriously  pondered  by  two  sorts  of 
persons  :  those  who  usurp  the  room  of  God  and  His  Christ,  by  thinking  (and 
practising  their  thought)  that  Church  Government  and  Govcrnours  arc 
alterable  by  secular  powers.  It's  strange  that  the  sin  of  Jeroboam,  the  son  of 
Nebat,  doth  not  deter  them  from  a  practice  so  audacious.  It  should  also  be 
seriously  considered  by  such  pretenders  to  personal  perfection  as  makes  them 
conceit  themselves  above  all  Ordinances. 

(2)  The  next  Christian  Institution  is  Baptism.  Our  Blessed  Lord 
having  proposed  to  form  a  Society,  and  in  order  to  that  having  ordained  a 
Ministrie  to  officiate  in  it,  He  in  the  next  place  appointed  Baptism  to  be  a 
sacred  door  or  solemn  mysterie,  in  and  by  which  all  these  who  arc  well 
qualified  should  be  admitted  or  received  into  the  same.  It  is  plain  that 
none  could  have  any  interest  in  the  Covenant  made  with  Abraham,  or  in 
that  with  his  posterity  through  the  mediation  of  Moses,  till  first  they  were 
Circumcised.  It's  also  plain  that  ther  was  not  any  religious  Society  even 
among  the  very  Heathens,  without  both  their  initiatory  and  perfective 
mysteries.  This  was  most  agreeable  to  the  principles  of  Government  in 
general,  with  respect  to  ane  invisible  Supreme  Governour.  Moreover,  water 
being  of  a  purifying  nature,  simple  also  and  uncompoundcd,  was  the  most 
apposite  symbol  could  be  chosen  for  admission  to  a  Societic  which,  of  all 
others,  in  the  intention  of  the  Founder,  was  to  be  the  most  pure  and  furthest 
removed  from  what  is  carnal  and  earthly,  and  which  is  dispositive  for  what 
is  sublime  and  celestial.  This  Ordinance  being  once  established  and  fixed 
by  its  great  Author,  He  admitted  none  therby  into  His  new  Society,  while 
lie  was  bodily  here  on  earth,  save  Jews,  these  of  that  Nation  being  so  far 
privilcdged  as  to  have  the  first  tender  of  the  Gospel  offered  to  them.  But 
after  His  Resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  when  He  was  to  ascend  into 
Heaven,  then  He  enlarged  the  Apostles'  commission,  commanding  them  to 
goe  teach,  that  is,  to  proselyte  all  Nations,  and  to  baptize  them,  etc. 

Baptism  is  not  only  a  Rite  or  Mysterie  of  Initiation  into  the  Covenant 
of  Grace,  but  also  a  Seal  of  it,  which  gives  it  legal  validity ;  even  as  in 
naturalizing  of  foreigners,  thcr  is  not  only  ane  act  of  naturalization,  but  that 
deed  must  also  have  the  Seal  appended,  and  it  must  pass  the  ordinary 
solemnities  ;  yea,  and  at  that  time  the  mutual  stipulations  must  be  struck, 
wherby  both  parties  are  solemnly  bound  to  one  another  for  mutual  perform 
ance — God  being  one  partie  and  the  admitted  Christians  the  other. 

It  is  needless  here  to  repeat  the  acts  of  grace  which  God  obliges  Himself 
to  perform,  in  consideration  of  the  merits  of  His  Son,  these  being  already 
condescended  on,  as  are  also  the  terms  and  conditions  to  which  the  party 
admitted  is  bound,  these  being  already  mentioned.  Only  here  it  will  not  be 
amiss  to  observe,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel  (as  the  Apostle  words 
it),  the  first  fruits  or  converts  were  persons  of  age  ;  and  these  behoved  to  be 
qualified — First,  by  Faith ;  2dly,  by  Renunciation  of  the  Devil,  who  was 
supposed  to  be  the  head  and  King  of  all  who  rejected  the  Gospel  after  con 
viction  ;  3dly,  by  Repentance,  which  implies  a  change  of  thoughts  and 


QUALIFICATIONS.  181 

principles,  as  well  as  of  moral  habits,  and  which  was  the  effect  of  God's 
preventing  grace,  as  is  already  said.  This  shews  the  necessity  of  an  interest 
in  the  Sacraments,  notwithstanding  of  antecedent  Faith  and  Repentance. 
Ther  were  at  that  time  many  pious  Jews,  particularly  the  Essens,  mentioned 
by  Josephus ;  ther  were  also  many  virtuous  Heathens  ;  and  it  was  then 
supposed  that  the  pietie  of  the  one  and  the  virtue  of  the  other  was  the  effect 
of  this  preventing  grace,  called  the  Trauicnt  [transient]  Visits  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  Yet  all  this  did  not  supersede  the  Sacraments,  or  gave  them  any 
title  to  the  benefits  of  the  Covenant.  This  is  yet  more  plain  from  luculent 
instances  in  Scripture.  Cornelius  hath  a  high  character  bestowed  011  him ; 
yea,  the  Holy  Ghost  had  extraordinary  descended  on  him  ;  yet  he  must  be 
Baptised.  S.  Paul  had  lived  in  all  good  conscience  ere  he  was  a  Christian, 
while  yet  a  Jew,  and  was  extraordinarly  converted,  even  by  a  vision  of  our 
Lord  in  His  excellent  glory,  which  was  reckoned  a  great  privilege  ;  and  for 
all  this  was  Baptised.  The  like  we  find  of  all  other  converts,  both  in  the 
sacred  text  and  in  Church  Historic. 

Thus,  the  persons  of  age  who  believed  and  repented  were  qualified  for 
Baptism.  But  then,  God  at  Baptism  performed  His  part  of  the  Covenant. 

The  first  act  was  that  of  Justification,  or  a  full  remission  of  all  the  sins, 
original  and  actual,  whereof  they  had  been  guilty,  antecedently  to  their 
admission  into  the  Christian  Covenant.  2dly.  A  thorough  purification  from 
these  pollutions  which  by  sin  cleave  unto  the  soul.  Belly.  A  Consecration 
to  the  Holy  Trinity.  4thly.  The  Collation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  to 
abide  with  them  as  a  living  principle.  By  means  of  this  they  were  partakers 
of  the  Divine  nature,  and  became  the  sons  of  God ;  hence  regenerated  and 
born  again  of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit ;  yea,  and  to  have  their  name 
written  in  the  Book  of  Life. 

Thus  it  was  with  those  who  were  exalted  to  the  privilege  of  Baptism  in 
the  beginning  of  Christianity ;  and  tho  the  time  in  which  the  Scriptures  of 
the  New  Testament  were  wrote  was  extraordinary,  ther  then  being  instan 
taneous  and  miraculous  changes  wrought  on  the  moral  habit  of  the  mind 
upon  the  belicfc  of  the  Gospel ;  yet  in  the  2d  and  3d  Century,  and  some 
ages  after,  these  who  believed  the  Gospel  were  not  admitted  to  Baptism,  but 
were  kept  in  the  state  of  Catechumens,  and  under  discipline,  not  only  till 
they  were  fully  instructed  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel,  but  also  till  their 
vicious  habits  were  reasonably  presumed  to  be  mortified,  and  their  persever 
ance  both  in  their  Faith  and  Holyness  secured  ;  and  indeed  lapses  into  wilful, 
deliberate,  and  habitual  sins  were  then  very  rare,  much  more  apostacy  from 
yc  Faith. 

As  for  the  children  of  Christian  parents,  they  were  supposed  to  be  of  the 
holy  seed,  and  therefor  had  a  title  to  Baptism ;  and  tho  they  were  not  pre 
disposed  by  actual  Faith  and  Repentance,  as  these  of  age,  yet  were  in  a 
negative  preparedness,  upon  the  account  of  their  descent  and  the  want  of 
actual  guilt,  the  original  defilement  being  done  away  by  Baptism,  and 
utmost  provision  being  made  by  the  Ministers  of  Religion  for  their  instruc 
tion  and  good  behaviour  for  the  future,  by  taking  Sponsors  who  represented 
them,  and  who  were  to  take  care  to  keep  parents  to  their  duty  of  education, 
and  to  supply  their  room  in  the  case  of  death. 

The  next  Institution  to  Baptism  is  Confirmation.  The  inhabitation  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  a  new  and  vital  principle,  is  so  very  necessary  for  the 
ends  which  Jesus  Christ  would  serve  on  the  souls  of  the  faithful,  that  after 


182  HOLY  CONFIRMATION. 

Baptism  lie  liutli  ordained  His  Ministers  to  lay  their  Lands  on  the  growing 
members  of  His  mystical  body,  and  to  confer  on  them  yet  greater  measures 
of  His  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  their  faith  and  piety  may  be  strengthened,  and 
the  young  beginners  fortified  in  their  spiritual  conflict  with  the  Devil,  the 
world,  and  the  flesh.  This  holy  Rite  of  Confirmation  was  practised  by  the 
Apostles  (Acts  viii.  14,  10,  xix.  (5,  Ileb.  vi.  2),  no  doubt  in  consequence  of  a, 
Divine  Revelation,  and  ever  after  by  their  successors  the  Bishops,  the  Ministers 
in  chief  of  Christ's  Religion.  This  was  done  after  a  solemn  and  pious  manner, 
with  prayer  and  faith,  and  in  (he  primitive  times  the  effect  followed  the 
performance  of  the  holy  Rite  ;  for  the  Confirmed  party  did  visibly  grow  in 
faith  and  in  all  manner  of  pietie  and  virtuous  practice,  insomuch  that 
Holiness  was  not  only  voluntary  but  delightful.  They  lived  by  faith  and  not 
by  sight ;  yea,  choosed  severities,  nay  and  martyrdom  itself,  when  these 
were  found  to  be  proofs  of  their  faith  and  charity  ;  they  trampled  on  the 
earth,  despised  death,  and  disdained  the  soft  solicitations  of  the  flesh  ;  they 
reckoned  Heaven  their  true  home,  this  life  but  a  journey  thitherward  in  the 
road  of  the  commands  and  example  of  Jesus,  and  were  not  much  ail'ected 
with  their  temporal  circumstances,  whether  good  or  bad,  no  more  than  a 
bardie  traveller  is  with  the  quality  of  the  weather  or  the  way.  That  this 
blissful  effect  doth  not  now  accompany  this,  and  indeed  all  the  other  Ordi 
nances,  is  owing  to  the  utter  decay  of  faith  and  pietie,  both  in  the  perform 
ers  and  recipients,  to  the  formal  and  pageant  Avay  of  administration,  and 
to  the  neglect  of  the  very  Ordinance  itself,  God  not  being  obliged  to  vouch 
safe  His  promised  favours  on  [un]  qualified  persons,  no  more  than  to  make 
uncultivated  ground  fruitful  of  good  grain.  There  is  a  wise  Providence  or  a 
Divine  order  in  grace,  as  ther  is  in  the  beautiful  disposition  of  material 
things.  The  effect  doth  not  follow  without  antecedent  dispositions. 

This  Rite  of  Confirmation  was  performed  in  the  Primitive  Church  by 
the  symbol  of  Oyle,  wherewith  the  forehead  of  the  Confirmed  party  was  Anoin 
ted,  that  being  the  visible  symbol  whereby  Kings,  Priests,  and  Prophets  among 
the  Jews  were  Consecrated  ;  the  Divine  Spirit,  for  the  right  discharge  of  their 
offices,  being  supposed  to  be  given  by  the  solemn  intervention  of  Anointing. 
Now,  Christians  being  Consecrated  anew  to  God  by  Confirmation  were  Anoin 
ted,  to  signify  their  being  indued  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Hence,  in  the  judgement 
of  the  best  Criticks,  that  Unction  by  the  Holy  One  is  Confirmation,  and  the 
Antients  interpret  our  Lord's  being  Anointed  with  the  Oyle  of  Gladness 
above  His  fellowcs,  to  mean  His  deriving  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  His  Disciples, 
by  which  He  eminently,  and  they  in  Him,  were  distinguished  from  the 
common  rout  of  mankind. 

The  Christian  Institution  next  to  this  is  the  Lord's  Supper.  It's  plain 
that  all  religious  persons  had  their  Mysteries  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world.  In  and  by  these  Mysteries  ther  was  a  communion  between  the  Deity 
and  the  votaries.  The  Deity  vouchsafed  favours  on  the  votaries,  and  they 
payed  unto  him  the  highest  acts  of  worship  and  service.  Some  of  these 
Mysteries  were  initiatory,  at  what  time  they  resigned  themselves  to  the 
Deity,  and  were  dedicated  to  him ;  some  progressive,  respecting  their  im 
provement  ;  and  yet  others  perfective.  It  is  not  questioned  but  these 
Mysteries  were  instituted  by  the  demons  themselves,  and  that  in  this  they 
imitated  the  true  and  living  God  in  His  manner  of  dealing  with  His  peculiar 
and  covenanted  people.  All  the  Divine  institutions  which  God  enjoyned 
His  people  from  the  beginning,  were  figures  of  and  directly  respected  that 


HOLY  EUCHARIST.  183 

most  intimate,  most  perfect,  good,  and  everlasting  Covenant,  which  He  was 
to  make  with  men  in  and  through  the  Messias,  and  this  sublime  Sacrament 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  specially  regarded.  It  is  plain  that  these  Cove 
nants  were  transacted  at  first,  and  afterward  ratified  by  Sacrifice.  Without 
blood  ther  was  no  remission  of  sins.  Hence  the  expiatory  Sacrifices  were 
substitutions  of  the  thing  sacrificed,  in  the  vice  and  room  of  the  party 
sacrificing.  All  the  Sacrifices  offered  up  by  the  people  of  God  from  the 
beginning  were  but  types  of  that  Sacrifice  which  Christ  was  to  offer  up,  and 
were  accepted  meerly  on  account  of  it ;  they  being  but  acts  in  view,  were 
figures  and  types  of  what  was  to  be  fulfilled,  were  therfor  imperfect,  and 
behoved  to  be  often  repeated.  Our  Lord  offered  up  His  body  a  Sacrifice  for 
the  sins  of  the  world  ;  and  it  being  highly  dignified  by  its  personal  union 
with  the  Divine  nature,  was  of  infinite  value  ;  and  as  it  fulfilled  the  inten 
tion  of  all  Sacrifices,  so  it  henceforward  superseded  the  use  of  all  bloody 
Sacrifices,  it  being  a  constant  and  universally  received  maxime  that  ther 
was  always  a  proportion  between  the  dignity  of  the  Sacrifice  and  the  degree 
of  its  merit.  Hence  the  abused  heathenish  custom  of  offering  up  human 
sacrifices.  This  is  not  all,  biit  moreover  the  party  sacrificing  was  priviledged 
to  cat  a  share  of  the  offered  Sacrifice,  to  denote  that  God  and  the  Sacrificer  were 
at  such  perfect  accord  that  they  feasted  together  on  the  same  common  viands 
and  at  the  same  common  table,  the  meat  and  the  Altar  or  Table  being  that  of 
God  hallowed  and  consecrated  to  Him  ;  so  that  God  was  the  inviter  and  enter 
tainer,  the  meat  and  table  being  His,  and  the  people  the  guests  or  the  party 
invited  and  entertained.  Finally,  the  meat  became  the  support,  sustenance, 
and  strength  of  the  eater,  by  which  he  was  enabled  to  do  his  work,  particularly 
the  service  he  owed  to  God,  and  by  which  his  life  was  prolonged.  Now,  the 
Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  Commemorative  Sacrifice  of  thanks 
giving  for  that  great  Sacrifice  of  Christ's  Body  once  offered  upon  the  Cross. 
Thus  it  was  universally  believed  by  the  first  Christian  Church  ;  hence  called 
by  them  the  Eucharist,  the  Eulogie,  and  often  the  Liturgic  or  Service,  by 
way  of  eminence.  They  thought  it  was  prefigured  by  the  Bread  and  Wine 
which  Melchiscdeck,  the  King  of  Salem,  and  Priest  of  the  Most  High  God, 
brought  forth  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xiv.  18).  They  thought  it  was  predicted 
by  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  1.  G,  1-i).  They  thought  it  was  the  pure  offering  which, 
with  the  incense  of  prayers,  was  to  be  offered  up  by  the  Gentiles,  foretold  by 
the  Prophet  Malachi.  They  thought  that  as  our  Lord  did  institute  and 
administer  that  Sacrament  to  His  Disciple*,  so  he  enjoyncd  them,  and  in 
them  their  Successors,  to  administer  the  same  to  the  Church  to  the  end  of 
the  world:  "Doe  this  in  remembrance  of  me;"  which  in  the  original 
signifies  a  priestly  act  in  sacrificial  functions.  They  believed  our  Lord  to 
have  spoken  of  this  Sacramental  Bread  in  His  long  discourse  with  the  Jews, 
Jo.  vi.  31  to  42  ;  and  it  is  obvious  that  of  this  Sacrament  the  Apostle  dis- 
courseth,  1  Cor.  x.  15  to  32.  Thus  they  understood  the  Altar,  whereof  these 
had  no  right  to  eat  which  served  the  Tabernacle,  viz.,  the  Jews  and  their 
Priests.  In  short,  the  breaking  of  bread,  and  eating  with  one  accord  in  the 
religious  Assemblies,  so  often  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Acts,  is  the  very 
same  thing. 

The  first  Christians,  therefor,  thought  and  believed  that  the  Christian 
Priest,  in  name  of  the  people,  offered  up  to  God  Bread  and  Wine  as  the 
Lord  of  His  creatures  ;  this  when  the  Elements  were  laid  on  the  Altar  or 
Table  of  God.  2.  When  He  pronounced  the  words  of  the  Institution,  and 


184  ANGELS  PRESENT  AT  THE  EUCHARIST. 

made  the  Prayer  of  Consecration,  then  they  became  the  Body  and  Blood  of 
Christ  mystical  or  spiritual,  not  the  natural  Flesh  and  Blood  of  our  Lord 
transubstantiated,  as  the  Church  of  Rome  would  have  it.  8.  When  the 
Christian  Priest  invited  the  people  to  partake,  then  both  Priest  and  people 
did  offer  up  to  Cod  the  Consecrated  Bread  and  Wine,  now  the  spiritual 
Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  made  such  by  the  contact  of  the  Spirit  (as  the 
Ancients  worded  it),  as  a  commemoration  of  the  great  Sacrifice  once  offered 
up  on  the  Altar  of  the  Cross,  in  virtue  of  Avhich  they  bcgg'd  the  pardon  of 
their  sins,  and  further  assistances  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  which  was  actually 
applied  to  them,  on  supposition  of  their  faith  and  charity.  4.  By  partaking 
of  meat  coming  iVom  the  Table  of  the  Lord,  they  believed  their  mutual 
renewing  of  their  Covenant  with  (rod,  that  they  keeped  Communion  with 
Him,  were  at  perfect  accord  with  Cod  and  with  one  another,  exactly  agreeable 
to  1  Cor.  x.  l(i,  Ac.  5.  They  believed  that  this  eating  the  Bread  and  Wine, 
now  the  Spiritual  and  Sacramental  Body  and  Blood  of  our  Lord,  did  nourish 
their  souls  to  life  everlasting,  agreeable  to  our  Saviour's  own  words,  Jo.  vi. 
32,  &c.  They  believed  ther  was  a  Spiritual  Body  as  well  as  a  Natural, 
according  to  the  express  words  of  the  Apostle,  1  Cor.  xv.  40,  and  1  Cor.  x. 
8,  4,  and  elsewhere. 

This  Account  of  this  great  Ordinance  I  doubt  nothing  they  had  from 
the  Divine  Spirit  in  the  Apostles,  and  therfor  infinitly  preferable  to  the 
novel,  fanciful  whims  of  Papists,  Lutherans,  Calvinists,  or  Socinians.  And 
this  rule  I  set  to  myself,  to  goc  by  true  and  credible  authority  in  matters  of 
mystical  and  supernatural  nature,  and  not  by  Philosophical  uncertain 
notions,  which  are  turned  into  varietie  of  forms,  as  men  would  serve  their 
respective  favourite  schemes  of  things  against  one  another  in  their  eternal 
and  scandalous  wrangles. 

Ther  is  yet  one  thing  remarkable  in  the  Ancients,  that  they  thought  the 
Angels  present  in  their  religious  Assemblies,  more  especially  at  the  celebra 
tion  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist.  It's  plain  that  the  Angels  are 
ministring  spirits  to  the  heirs  of  salvation  (Heb.  i.  14)  ;  'tis  plain  they 
rejoice  in  the  conversion  of  a  sinner  (Luke  xv.  7) ;  it's  plain  that  our  Lord 
aliirms  them  to  be  guardians  of  little  children  ;  it  is  also  plain  that  women 
were  commanded  to  have  their  heads  covered  in  the  publick  Assemblies, 
because  of  the  Angels  ;  it  is  plain  that  they  are  tenderly  affected  with  the 
miseries  of  the  Church  here  on  earth,  [which]  should  joyn  with  them  in  such 
Angelick  Hymns  as  arc  made  known  to  the  Church  (Ps.  ciii.  20,  21).  To 
join  with  them  in  these  known  choirs,  hath  nothing  of  Popish  Idolatrie  in 
it ;  it  seems  on  the  contrary  to  be  commanded.  This  argues  no  omniscience 
in  them,  seeing  all  the  above  cited  places  prove  them  present  with  us,  if  not 
at  all  times,  yet  habitually.  Doth  not  this  give  us  some  deeper  impressions 
of  the  invisible  world,  and  shew  the  relation  they  have  to  us  ? 

From  this  it  nowise  will  follow  that  we  may  pray  unto  them,  because  it 
is  expressly  forbidden,  as  derogatory  to  the  honour  due  to  God,  and  Him 
alone.  It  is  the  priviledge  of  these  in  Covenant  with  God,  particularly 
Christians,  that  they  are  allowed  direct  access  to  God,  their  God  in  Cove 
nant,  and  that  through  no  other  Mediator  than  Jesus  Christ.  Whence,  as 
it  was  criminal  in  the  Jew,  so  it  is  much  more  in  the  Christian  to  apply  [to] 
the  Most  High  by  any  other  intercessor.  The  Members  of  the  Church  are 
expressly  commanded  to  pray  with  and  for  one  another  ;  but  no  such  com 
mand  for  addresses  to  or  through  Angels.  Our  fellow  Christians  are  visible, 


THE  VIATICUM.  185 

men  of  like  passions  with  ourselves ;  therefor,  no  fear  of  rushing  into 
Idolatry  by  imploying  their  intercessions  ;  nor  doe  we  pay  them  any  religious 
worship  when  for  this  end  we  apply  to  them.  The  case  is  otherwise  with 
Saints  and  Angels  ;  they  are  invisible,  they  vastly  excel  us,  and  are  of  more 
power ;  therfor  prayers  unto  them,  even  for  no  more  than  intercession,  may 
fairly  lead  into  Idolatry,  from  which  we  should  stand  at  the  greatest  distance. 

Ther  was  yet  another  practice  among  the  Ancients.  It  was  of  giving 
this  Holy  Sacrament  to  the  faithful  in  perilous  and  afflicting  circumstances, 
such  as  these  of  personal  or  publick  calamities,  in  times  of  persecution,  on 
a  sick  bed,  particularly  when  death  was  reasonably  presumed  to  be  ap 
proaching.  They  thought  this  Bread  of  Life  and  "Wine  of  Consolation  did 
mightily  support  the  faithful  under  their  conflict,  and  inspired  them  with 
noble  fortitude,  as  to  bear  their  burden  so  to  resist  all  the  temptations  of  the 
Devil  to  infidelity,  distrust,  impatience,  or  murmuring  under  the  rod  of  God. 
Nay,  if  the  afflicted  party  had  been  a  heinous  sinner,  and  was  penitent,  and 
if  death  was  reasonably  feared,  then  the  Minister  of  Religion  absolved  him, 
and  then  administered  to  him  the  Holy  Sacrament,  on  condition  still,  that 
if  he  recovered  he  should  signify  his  repentance  for  removing  the  scandal  by 
such  ways  as  the  Governours  of  the  Church  judged  most  expedient.  The 
sum  of  the  whole  is  this.  Man,  tho  in  all  respects  ane  innocent  creature 
and  perfect  in  his  kind,  yet  is  obliged  to  worship  and  serve  his  Creator. 
This  worship  and  service  must  not  depend  on  the  contrivance  and  choice  of 
the  creature,  but  must  be  instituted  and  a]  pointed  by  Him  the  Creator.  If 
this  be  reasonable  with  respect  to  ane  innocent  rational  creature,  much  more 
so  with  regard  to  ane  offending  and  sinful  creature.  This  worship  and 
service  which  this  offending  and  sinful  creature  owes  to  his  Creator,  must 
be  manifested  to  him,  and  he  must  be  assured  that  it  is  the  will  and  mind 
of  the  Creator.  This  assurance  is  from  supernatural  acts  of  the  Creator, 
attesting  that  the  worship  and  service  is  really  that  of  the  Creator,  and  not 
that  of  any  impostor,  cither  bad  angel  or  man.  This  worship  and  service 
thus  attested  is  the  rather  necessary,  that  the  reason  of  man,  ever  since  his 
Apostasy  (which  chiefly  lies  in  his  falling  in  with  his  animal  bents  against 
the  dictates  of  the  Divine  Spirit),  is  both  weakned  and  debauched.  The 
manifestation  of  the  worship  and  service  which  the  Creator  requires  is  yet 
the  more  necessary,  that  his  reason  being  prone  to  sensible  things  and  averse 
to  those  of  a  moral  and  spiritual  nature,  he  would  not  apprehend  or  believe 
moral  or  spiritual  propositions,  unless  he  were  convinced  that  they  were 
propounded  and  injoincd  by  God.  This  revelation  or  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  will  is  yet  more  necessary,  that  God  intends  all  men  who  know  it 
should  submit  unto  it,  as  a  common  and  uniform  standard,  and  that  every 
individual  should  not  be  at  liberty  to  conceit  and  act  his  conceits  as  he 
pleases  ;  but  that  all  men,  having  the  same  common  nature,  should  be  uni 
formly  determined  by  the  one  common  rule,  which  is  the  will  of  God,  and 
not  that  of  any  impostor.  This,  if  adverted  to,  cuts  off  all  pretensions  of 
freethinkers  and  latitudinarians,  who  abandon  to  their  own  conceits,  not 
regarding  the  will  of  God  as  the  general  standard  to  which  they  ought  to 
submit  their  judgements. 

The  propositions  declared   and  enjoined  in  Holy  Scripture  are  these 

which  God  hath  propounded  and  attested  to  be  His,  and  not  of  any  creature, 

as  is  clearly  proven  by  many  facts,  and  for  which  we  have  as  much  evidence 

as  we  have  for  unquestionable  history  for  distant  countries  in  which  we 

VOL.  n.  1  A 


1HO  GOD'S  PROPOSITIONS. 

have  not  been  ourselves ;  yea,  and  for  charters  on  which  our  properties  are 
bounded. 

The  true  sense  and  meaning  of  these  propositions  revealed  by  God,  is 
what  was  that  of  those  to  whom  they  were  at  first  revealed,  since  it  is 
impossible  that  God  could  deceive  them,  seeing  every  one,  the  most  rude 
not  excepted,  understood  the  language,  the  terms  and  notions  alluded  to  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  ;  seeing  they  were  perfectly  good,  despised  all  things  in 
comparison,  and  scaled  the  truth  of  them,  when  called,  with  their  blood. 

This  sense  of  these  first  Christians  is  infinitely  preferable  to  that  of 
those  who  live  and  have  lived  at  a  vast  distance  ;  Avho  have  the  language, 
the  idioms,  the  terms  of  art,  and  the  notions  alluded  to.  to  acquire  ;  who  are 
also  interested,  divided,  and  eternally  subdivided. 

These  Divine  Revelations,  thus  understood,  give  us  aue  Account  that 
the  way  which  God  took  <o  oblige  man  to  pay  Him  that  worship  and  service 
which  should  be  acceptable  to  Him  and  render  God  propitious,  hath  been 
always  by  entering  in  Covenants  with  such  men  as  for  whom  He  designed 
that  priviledgc. 

]>y  these  Covenants  God  obliged  Himself  by  promise  to  vouchsafe  such 
particular  favours;  and  the  covenanting  persons  were  obliged  to  fulfil,  on 
their  part,  such  terms  and  conditions  as  required  and  prescribed. 

All  the  Covenants,  since  the  apostacy  of  our  first  parents,  were  but 
preparatory,  and  had  a  direct  reference  to  the  great,  the  better,  and  ever 
lasting  Covenant  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  favours  which 
God  promises  to  such  as  are  w'in  this  Covenant,  are — Remission  of  sins ; 
acceptance  of  ane  imperfect  duty,  it'  sincere,  as  if  it  were  perfect;  forgiven- 
ncss  of  relapses  into  sin  after  Baptism,  on  supposition  of  true  repentance; 
the  Holy  Spirit's  inhabitation,  and  everlasting  happiness  in  the  highest 
Heavens. 

The  terms  and  conditions  to  be  performed  by  the  covenanting  persons 
are  of  two  kinds — 1.  These  of  a  moral ;  2.  these  of  a  positive  nature.  These 
of  a  moral  nature  are  Faith  in  the  doctrines,  precepts,  promises,  and  threat- 
iiings  of  the  Gospel;  Charitie,  that  is  the  love  of  God  and  man,  expressed 
by  a  free,  voluntary,  and  cheerful  obedience  to  all  His  commands — the  which 
includes  sincerity,  improvement  in  pietie  and  Christian  virtue,  and  perse 
verance  in  well  doing  to  the  end  of  the  life  ;  Repentance  in  cases  of  wilful 
lapses  into  sin,  of  the  commission  of  any  heinous  sin,  living  in  any  one  or 
more  vicious  habits,  and  even  negligence,  or  spiritual  sloth  and  stupidity. 
This  Repentance  includes  Mortification,  Avhich  consists  in  a  victory  over  our 
carnal  and  earthly  bents,  and  generally  all  our  animal  appetites,  as  far  as 
they  are  inordinate  or  immoderate  ;  and  this  constitutes  the  virtue  of 
Temperance  and  Sobrietie. 

These  are  the  conditions  of  a  moral  nature,  called  such  because  they 
are  enforced  by  prime  reasons.  The  other  are  of  a  positive  nature,  because 
they  are  founded  only  on  Divine  authoritie  and  God's  positive  institution. 
These  are  the  Ministrie,  Sacraments,  and  Ordinances.  God  hath  peremp- 
torly  enjoyiied  the  observance  of  them,  and  that  by  Sanctions  strong  as  these 
by  which  He  hath  inforced  the  moral  precepts.  Nay,  He  hath  more  signally 
manifested  His  displeasure  against  such  as  brake  in  upon  them  than  against 
trespasses  on  the  moral  precepts,  because  His  authority  is  only  that  which 
supports  them ;  wheras  strong  cogent  reasons  command  the  other. 

This   should  oblige  all  to  inquire  accuratly  into  the   commission  of 


KOBEiri1  KEITH.  167 

Ministers  of  licligion,  since  on  that  the  validity  of  Sacraments  depends  ;  and 
unless  the  Sacraments  we  receive  he  valid,  we  can  can  have  110  assurance  of 
salvation  after  a  legal  ordinary  way,  particularly  when  the  ordinary  way  is 
at  hand  and  in  our  option,  and  nothing  to  clot  err  us  from  it  hut  some  earthly 
inconvenience,  or  perhaps  that  which  is  worse,  some  whim,  conceit,  or 
caprice  of  our  own.  It  must  in  that  case  he  a  matter  of  extreme  danger  to 
trust  to  an  uncovenanted  extraordinary  way.  I  know  the  Socinians  and 
their  favourers,  the  Arminians,  the  Calvinists  also,  the  Independants,  and 
the  Prcshyterians,  have  erected  schemes  of  Divinity  different  from  this  ;  hut 
this  is  that  which  was  once  and  lirst  delivered  to  the  Saints  by  the  Spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  I  will  trust  to  no  other  in  such  important  matters  as  arc 
the  Glory  of  God,  the  Honour  of  Jesus,  and  Everlasting  Salvation. 


LV.  EGBERT  KEITH.     A.D.  1733-43.     (Xo  Seal.) 

In  regard  to  his  Birth  and  Family,  we  arc  supplied  with  some 
well-authenticated  facts,  furnished  hy  himself,  in  two  different 
forms.  A  few  years  before  his  Death  he  was  induced  to  yield 
to  the  importunity  of  a  Clerical  friend,  and  to  commit  to  him 
certain  Particulars  relative  to  his  early  history,  for  which  we 
should  have  looked  in  vain  to  any  other  quarter.  This  little 
piece  of  Autobiography  begins  as  follows  :— 

I  was  Born  at  I'ras,  in  the  Mearns,  on  Monday,  February  7,  1081,  and 
named  liobert,  after  the  Viscount  of  Arbuthnot,  in  the  Shire  of  Kincardine, 
who  was  a  kind  friend  to  my  father ;  and  suckled  by  my  own  mother, 
Marjory  Arbuthnot.  My  father,  Alexander  Keith,  Died  Thursday,  January 
'25,  1083  ;  and  I  have  been  told  that,  in  the  course  of  his  fever,  he  took  me 
in  his  arms,  dandled  me,  and  said,  "  If  I«dic  at  this  time,  0!  that  my  keen 
cockie  would  go  with  me!"  Besides  my  eldest  brother  Alexander,  who  had 
been  Married  in  the  end  of  the  preceding  year,  I  had  three  sisters,  &c.,  &c. 

N.B. — The  occasion  of  writing  the  above,  says  Bishop  Forbes,  was  this: 
Upon  Bishop  Keith's  informing  that  he  had,  at  the  particular  desire  of  Dr. 
George  Garden,  Translated  a  part  of  Dr.  Forbes's  Diary,  I  said  that  was  a 
thing  not  at  all  known,  and  therefore  it  ought  to  be  recorded  in  some  proper 
way.  He  answered,  "  That  I  might  note  it  down  on  a  bit  of  paper,  in  any 
shape  I  pleased."  "  No,  Sir,"  said  I,  "  it  would  be  far  more  advisable  that 
you  should  leave  some  short  account  of  yourself  to  posterity,  under  your 
own  hand."  He  thanked  me  for  the  hint,  and  said  he  would  think  of  it. 
This  happened  after  175'2,  when  he  had  left  Edinburgh,  and  was  living  at 
Bonnyhaugh,  near  Leith. 

Much  about  the  same  time,  too,  he  entered  into  a  Contro 
versy  with  the  late  Mr.  Keith  of  Ravelston,  in  regard  to  the 


188  DISTRICT  OF  FIl-'l-:. 

comparative  proximity  of  their  several  Families  to  the  noble  liace 
of  the  Earls  Marisclial ;  and  in  pursuance  of  the  claims  which  he 
there  urged  in  behalf  of  his  nephews  to  the  honour  of  a  Lineal 
descent,  he  thought  proper  to  draw  up  a  short  statement  of  facts, 
to  which  he  gave  the  title  of  "A  VINDICATION  of  Mr.  Robert 
Keith,  and  of  his  young  Grand-nephew,  Alexander  Keith,  from 
the  unfriendly  representation  of  Mr.  Alexander  Keith,  Jim.,  of 
Piavclston,  one  of  the  Under- Clerks  in  the  Court  of  Session." 
This  is  Printed  at  the  end  of  Lawson's  Biographical  Sketch  of 
Bishop  Keith,  in  his  Edition  of  the  "History  of  the  Affairs  of 
Church  and  State  in  Scotland,"  Published  in  1844  by  the 
Spottiswoode  Socictij,  p.  Li'.ccii. 

Uras  is  in  the  Parish  of  Dunnottar,  a  small  estate  of  which 
his  Family  possessed  either  the  /•Vr-.s/////^',  or  what  in  Scotland 
is  called  the  U'ctdact.  Having  lost  his  father  while  only  two 
years  of  age,  he  was  indebted  for  the  knowledge  of  letters,  and 
for  the  still  more  important  lessons  of  early  virtue  and  religion, 
to  his  mother ;  who,  when  he  had  arrived  at  the  age  of  seven 
years,  removed  with  him  to  Aberdeen,  where,  on  a  very  limited 
income,  and  chiefly  by  means  of  her  own  industry,  she  procured 
for  him  a  good  education  both  at  school  and  Marisclial  College, 
which  was  founded  by  his  collateral  relative,  George,  fifth  Earl 
Marisclial,  in  1593.  His  excellent  mother  was  the  daughter  of 
Piobert  Arbuthnot  of  Little  £iddcs,  in  Kincardineshire,  and  her 
prudence  and  affection  appear  to  have  left  a  deep  impression  on 
the  mind  of  her  son.  Alluding  to  her  unceasing  exertions  in  his 
behalf,  he  says,  in  the  Notes  dictated  to  Bishop  Forbes — "For 
these  and  many  many  other  obligations  I  owe  her  memory,  I  do 
pay  her  much  acknowledgment."  "  She  Died  at  Aberdeen,"  he 
adds,  "  on  Saturday  the  Cth  December,  1707,  about  the  G9th  year 
of  her  age,  after  she  had  the  comfort  of  seeing  me  Preceptor  or 
Tutor  to  my  young  Chief,  the  Lord  Keith,  from  the  month  of 
July,  1703 ;  with  whom  and  his  brother  I  continued  seven  full 
years,  till  July,  1710." 

The  Bishop  alludes  to  a  report  which  had  reached  his  ears, 
that  he  had  likewise  been  Tutor  to  Mr.  Alexander  Garden,  of 
Troup.  "  This,"  says  lie,  "  is  not  correct.  I  was  indeed  a  good 


IIOIJKLIT  KKLTH.  is;) 

acquaintance  of  theirs  at  College,  and  no  more.  During  my 
long  abode  at  Aberdeen,  I  had  the  happiness  to  be  much 
acquainted  with  the  worthy  and  learned  Dr.  George  Garden, 
Deprived  Minister  of  that  City ;  from  whom  I  had  the  oppor 
tunity  to  receive  many  internal  good  books,  for  which  I  bless 
God  to  this  day.  And  as  the  Doctor  was  employed  about  that 
time  in  a  new  Edition  of  the  excellent  Works  of  the  very  learned 
Dr.  John  Forbes  of  Corse,  he  was  pleased  to  desire  me  to  Trans 
late  into  Latin  the  last  seven  years  of  "Dr.  Forbes's  Diary,  or 
rita  Interior." 

In  the  Life  of  a  Scotchman,  however  meanly  born,  the  article 
of  Pedigree,  in  the  Seventeenth  Century,  was,  in  all  cases,  a  con 
sideration  of  some  weight ;  for,  if  he  had  not  to  tell  of  hereditary 
wealth  or  Family  honours,  he  was  pleased  with  the  assurance 
that  his  parents  were  virtuous,  and  perhaps  with  the  tradition 
that  their  blood  had  been  improved  by  some  illustrious  con 
nexion.  But,  in  this  respect,  Bishop  Keith  had  more  to  boast 
of  than  Scottish  Churchmen  usually  have  in  modern  times  :  and 
no  one  ever  valued  more  highly  his  relationship  with  the  Noble 
and  the  Great  than  did  this  humble  Pastor  of  a  poor,  depressed, 
and  calumniated  Branch  of  Christ's  Catholic  Church.  He  was 
a  Cadet  of  the  celebrated  Family  of  Keith,  Faiis  Marischal  of 
Scotland,  being  lineally  descended  from  Alexander,  the  youngest 
son  of  William  the  third  Earl.  In  1513,  this  Nobleman  con 
ferred  upon  the  ancestor  of  the  Bishop  the  Lands  of  Pittcndrurn, 
in  the  Shire  of  Aberdeen  ;  which  Grant  is  vouched  by  an  attested 
copy  of  the  precept  of  Sasine,  inserted  in  the  controversial 
Pamphlet  alluded  to.  After  the  lapse  of  little  more  than  a 
Century,  we  find  the  Laird  of  Pittendruin  in  possession  of  the 
Estate  of  Over  and  Nether  Cowton,  in  the  Parish  of  Fetteresso, 
adjoining  Dumiottar ;  for  which  acquisition  also  the  Instrument 
of  legal  investment  is  produced  at  full  length  from  the  Register 
of  Sasines.  But  the  Lands  of  Cowton  passed  away  from  the 
Bishop's  Family  in  the  person  of  his  immediate  ancestor ;  who, 
having  "  denuded  himself,"  as  the  phrase  is,  of  that  Property,  in 
1672,  purchased  the  Estate  of  Uras,  in  the  Parish  of  Dumiottar 
and  Shire  of  Kincardine.  As  an  apology  for  this  alienation  of 


!<;o  DltSTliLl'T  Oi:'  F1FM. 

tlio  Family  inlierituiice,  the  good  13isliop  thinks  it  necessary  to 
add,  in  a  Note,  that  "  this  hasty  denudation  did  not  proceed  from 
a  squandering  temper  in  my  father,  lint  from  his  haying  enlisted 
himself  a  volunteer  in  that  expedition  under  King  Charles  II. 
(which  ended  in  the  unfortunate  battle  of  Worcester)  whilst  a 
mere  strippling  only  of  about  eighteen  years  of  age  ;  and 
although  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  escape  out  of  prison  by  the 
means  and  contrivance  of  t\vo  English  ladies,  yet  the  difficulties 
he  was  exposed  to,  and  the  inciinibrances  which  naturally  came 
upon  his  small  Estate  during  the  long  continuance  of  the 
Rebellion,  stuck  severely  to  him  all  his  days  after,  and  do  stick 
to  his  offspring  to  this  d;iy." 

Having  mentioned  the  misunderstanding  which  arose  between 
the  Bishop  and  the  late  Alexander  Keith,  of  luivelston  (a  beauti 
ful  Property  at  the  foot  of  Corstorpliine  Hill,  about  two  miles 
west  of  Edinburgh,  on  the  road  to  Glasgow),  respecting  the 
relationship  of  their  Families  to  the  ancient  Race  of  the  Earls 
Marischal,  it  may  be  stated  that  the  superior  claims  of  the 
Bishop  in  behalf  of  his  nephew  were  well  founded  ;  and  so  long 
as  the  Uras  branch  of  the  Pittendrum  Keiths  existed  in  the  male 
line,  the  Keiths  of  Bavelston  were  not  entitled  to  the  honour  to 
which  they  have  since  succeeded. 

About  a  month  after  he  retired  from  tin;  situation  of  Precep 
tor  to  his  noble  relatives,  he  was  admitted  to  the  Order  of 
Deacons  on  the  10th  of  August,  1710,  by  the  Eight  Reverend 
George  Halyburton,  the  Deprived  Lord  Bishop  of  Aberdeen ; 
and  in  November  following,  he  informs  us,  he  became  Domestic 
Chaplain  to  Charles,  twelfth  Earl  of  Erroll,  and  his  mother  the 
Countess,  who  was  Lady  Anne  Drummond,  only  daughter  of 
James,  third  Earl  of  Perth.  In  June,  171:2,  he  accompanied  his 
Lordship  to  the  Baths  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  ;  and  in  passing 
through  Holland  he  was  greatly  delighted  with  an  opportunity  of 
enjoying  the  acquaintance  and  conversation  of  the  celebrated 
Peter  Poiret,  famous  for  his  mystic  and  speculative  Writings, 
who  attacked  Des  Cartes,  Locke,  and  Spinoza,  and  Published 
both  an  Apology  for  Madame  Bourignon,  and  a  complete  Edition 
of  her  Works  in  21  Volumes.  In  the  course  of  their  Journey  he 


ROBERT  KEITH.  101 

was  also  gratified  with  a  short  residence  in  Amsterdam,  Rotter 
dam,  Dort,  Leyden,  Utrecht,  Nemuegen,  Cleves,  and  Cologne  : 
and  leaving  his  Lordship  at  Aix,  he  returned  homewards  through 
Maestriclit,  Antwerp,  Ghent,  Bruges,  Ostend,  Neuport,  and 
Dunkirk.  "At  this  last  place,"  says  he,  "  I  took  ship  ;  hut  we 
were  soon  obliged  to  put  into  Calais.  Next  day  we  set  sail  again 
for  England,  but  met  with  a  most  prodigious  storm  of  wind, 
insomuch  that  sonic  ships  were  lost  just  in  the  passage  near  to 
us.  However,  it  pleased  God  that  I  landed  safe  at  Dover,  S. 
Michael's  Day,  1712,  where  I  remained  a  long  time  very  tender 
through  the  wet  and  cold  during  the  storm.  I  set  out  in  the 
stage  coach  for  Edinburgh,  February  2,  1718.'' 

The  Bishop  seems  naturally  to  have  possessed  that  peculiar 
turn  of  mind  which  leads  to  the  investigation  of  Antiquities,  and 
which  appears  to  derive  the  most  exquisite  gratification  from 
ascertaining  even  the  minutest  relations  of  a  Genealogical  Table. 
In  his  "Vindication,"  accordingly,  the  Reader  will  find  the  most 
precise  and  regularly  authenticated  statements  of  all  such  trans 
actions  in  which  his  Family  were  concerned,  as  might  in  the 
least  degree  illustrate  the  purity  of  their  descent,  and  the  respec- 
tabilit}r  of  their  connexions.  For  instance,  after  furnishing  a 
Copy  of  the  Contract  of  Marriage  between  his  grandfather  and 
grandmother,  and  having  specified  that  the  Litter  was  the 
daughter  of  Gawn  Douglas  of  Easter  B arras,  he  adds  in  a  Note 
—"This  Gawn  Douglas  was  a  son  of  that  Laird  of  Glenbervy 
who  became  Earl  of  Angus  about  the  year  1588,  and  by  this 
Marriage  Mr.  Robert  Keith  ( lii nisei fj  and  his  nephew  have  the 
honour  to  be  related  to  the  Dukes  of  Douglas  and  Hamilton,  and 
to  all  the  branches  of  these  most  honourable  Families  since  that 
Marriage."  Alluding  again  to  the  kindred  of  his  mother,  he 
remarks  that,  by  her  marriage  into  the  Family  of  Keith,  their 
posterity  "  are  related  to  all  the  Arbuthnots  and  Burnets  in  the 
Shire  of  Mearns." 

He  concludes  his  "Vindication,"  too,  in  the  same  spirit  of 
Family  love,  and  with  a  just  sense  of  the  importance  which 
attached  to  the  discussion  in  which  he  had  been  so  successfully 
engaged.  "Mr.  Robert  Keith  hopes  that  all  his  friends,  and 


192  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

every  unprejudiced  person  into  whose  hands  this  Paper  may 
chance  to  fall  (for  he  has  only  Printed  some  few  Copies  to  be 
privately  given  away),  will  have  him  excused  for  vindicating  his 
own  and  nephew's  Birth  ;  for  although  he  himself,  now  in  the 
close  of  the  70th  year  of  his  age,  and  having  only  one  daughter, 
might  he  pretty  indifferent  about  any  thing  of  this  nature,  yet  he 
suspects  his  young  grandnephews  (for  there  are  no  less  than  three 
of  them,  Alexander,  Iiobert,  and  John),  when  they  came  of  age, 
might  reproach  the  memory  of  their  uncle,  and  justly  perhaps, 
for  his  not  endeavouring  to  set  their  Birth  at  rights  against  so 
flagrant  an  attack,  seeing  the  one  was  capable,  and  the  others 
might  not  have  the  same  means  of  knowing,  or  the  same  abilities 
to  perform  it." 

Keith,  as  has  been  already  stated,  was  Ordained  a  Deacon  on 
the  10th  of  August,  1710.  On  his  return  from  the  Continent, 
after  his  engagement  with  Lord  Erroll,  he  was  invited  by  one  of 
the  numerous  small  Congregations  then  in  Edinburgh  to  become 
their  Pastor ;  and  accordingly  he  was  raised  to  the  Priesthood 
by  Bishop  Ilalyburton,  on  the  20th  of  May,  1718.  It  is  worthy 
of  remark  that  he  continued  in  the  same  Charge  till  the-  day  of 
his  Death. 

Xinnler  18  in  BisJtnp  Forbes'  Ccitalor/ue  in  tJie  Fjiiscujial  Cabinet. 

12.  (Original)  Deed  of  Diaconate  to  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  by  Bishop  of 
Aberdeen,  August  10,  1710.  "  Secnndum  ritus  et  morem  antiqutc  ecclesire." 

10.  (Original  Deed)  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  Presbyterate,  by  the  Bishop  of 
Aberdeen,  May  20,  1713.  "  Secundum,"  &c.,  as  above. 

The  talents  and  learning  of  such  a  man  could  not  fail,  even 
in  the  miserable  times  wherein  his  lot  was  cast,  to  procure  for 
him  a  certain  degree  of  influence  in  the  Church  to  which  he  had 
attached  himself,  and  even  to  establish  his  character  among  those 
of  a  different  Communion,  as  an  able  Scholar,  Historian,  and 
Antiquary.  He  is,  accordingly,  found  taking  an  active  share  in 
all  the  measures  that  were  proposed,  either  for  restoring  Purity 
of  Worship,  or  for  propping  the  pillars  of  that  Ecclesiastical 
System,  in  the  Divine  Institution  of  which  he  believed,  and  for 
the  maintenance  of  which  he  spared  no  labour  and  grudged  no 


ROBERT  KEITH.  193 

sacrifice.  There  remains  a  number  of  Letters  which  passed 
between  him  and  Bishop  Smith  of  England,  respecting  the  affairs 
of  the  two  Non-Juring  Churches. 


1.  An  exact  List  of  Bishop  Smith's  Letters,  according  to  their  Dates, 
in  the  handwriting  of  Bishop  Keith. 

2.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Smith  to  Bishop  Gillan,  Michaelmas-day,  1732, 
requesting  a  Correspondence  giving  an  Account  of  his  Book,  then  Published, 
in  Order  to  promote  an  Union  among  Nonjurors  in  England  ;  that  an  agree 
ment  had  been  accordingly  made  on  3d  instant,  one  Bishop  exceptcd ;   but 
that  Mr.  Lawrence  had  virulently  Published  against  it,  being  mainly  encour 
aged  by  Bishop  Campbell,  &c. ;  and  that  these  two  were  thinking  of  applying 
to  Scotland  for  Consecrations,  but  he  hopes  they  will  meet  Avith  a  repulse  ; 
and  last  of  all  begs  a  particular  Account  of  the  precise  terms  of  Union  in 
Scotland.— The  following,  having  reference  to  the  above,  are  also  in  the 
Catalogue : — 

3-4  of  Number  4.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Campbell  to  Bishop  Rattray, 
Aprile  10,  1733,  about  ye  Consecrating  Mr.  Lawrence  a  Bishop  by 
Bishop  Campbell  alone,  craving  Bishop  Rath-ay's  consent  and  appro 
bation,  AY'  Bishop  Rath-ay's  Answer  tacked  to  it  (holograph),  May  4, 
1733,  refusing  to  give  any  opinion  w'out  consulting  the  other  Bishops  of 
Scotland. 

12  of  Number  9.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Rattray  to  Bishop  Keith, 
Deer.  G,  1732,  wherein  of  a  Letter  from  Bishop  Campbell,  craving 
assistance  or  consent  for  Consecrating  a  Bishop,  &c. ;  Avhich  Bishop 
Rattray  not  only  declined,  but  dissuaded  Bishop  Campbell  from  any  such 
attempt ;  and  that  Bishop  Ouchterlonie  had  wisely  dropt  his  formula. 

35  of  Number  4.  (Holograph)  Messrs.  Clarke  and  Pierce  to  Bishop 
Rattray,  Aprile  10,  1723,  hoping  for  his  approbation  of  the  Consecra 
tion  of  s(1  Mr.  Laurence  by  Bishop  Campbell,  .SY////.V. 

30  of  Number  4.  (Holograph)  Dr.  Deacon,  of  Manchester,  to  Dr. 
Rattray,  April  20,  1733,  extremely  earnest  for  his  encouragement  in  and 
approbation  of  the  above-mentioned  Consecration. 

3.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Smith  to  Bishop  Gillan,  Octor.  17,  1732,  con 
gratulatory  on  the  Concordate,  and  thanking  for  so  particular  an  Account  of 
it,  and  informing  very  particularly  about  terms  of  Union  in  England  from 
first  to  last.     Herein  these  remarkable  words,  viz.,  "I  leave  you  to  judge 
whether  those  who  have  the  chief  authority  in  the  Church,  and  the  solo  right 
over  the  Discipline  thereof  (the  Presbyters  by  the  Laws  of  the  Church  of 
England  having  no  power  in  such  matters,  but  in  a  due   obedience  and 
subordination  to  the  Bishops),  ought  not  rather  to  exert  their  authority  in 
such  a  case  as  this,  than  to  suffer  it  to  be  despised,  &c." 

4.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  Dccemr.  31,  1732;   that  some  Presbyters, 
who  had  sought  the  Episcopate  with  eagerness  and  ambition,  were  much 

VOL.  n.  2  n 


10 1  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

incensed  at  Bishop  Smith  s  Promotion,  who  had  been  Diaconate,  Prcsbyter- 
atc,  and  Episcopate,  in  the  space  of  18  days  ;  and  that  Messrs.  Campbell  and 
Laurence  either  have  sent  or  design  to  send  to  Scotland  for  a  Commission 
to  continue  their  Succession,  as  above. 

5.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  June  20,  1733,  condoling  upon  the  Death 
of  Bishop  Duncan,  and  requesting  a  Catalogue  of  the  Bishops  in  Scotland 
since  the  Revolution. 

G.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  September  11,  1732,  wherein  he  assigns  the 
reason  of  their  fatal  disorders,  by  giving  a  quotation  out  of  S.  Cyprian  as  to 
the  ambition  and  pride  of  Presbyters;  that  some  Presbyters  in  England, 
because  not  called  to  the  Episcopate,  have  turned  rebels  against  it,  and 
openly  enough  declared  for  a  Presbyterian  Parity;  and  y4  Bishop  Doughty 
of  England  was  Consecrated  in  Ed1'  by  Bishops  Fullarton,  Miller,  Irvine, 
and  Frecbairn. 

4  of  Number  11.  (Holograph)  Mr.  Robert  Keith  to  Dr.  Rattvay, 
March  31,  172."),  informing  that  one  Mr.  Doughty,  an  English  Divine, 
Avas  in  Ed1',  and  had  been  Consecrated  the  day  before,  to  make  a  com 
petent  number  of  Bishops  on  Mr.  Spinckes'  side. 

7.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Smith  to  Bishop  Gillan,  Michaelmas-day,  1733  ; 
very  desirous  that  the  Bishop  of  Scotland  would  declare  for  them,  and  agl 
Messrs.  Campbell  and  Lawrence. 

8.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  Jaiiry.  18,  1733-4,  taking  it  in  good  part, 
that  the  Bishops  of  Scotland  care  not  to  make  any  Declaration  according  to 
his  desire. 

0.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  March  31,  1734;  still  very  desirous  the 
Bishops  of  Scotland  would  make  some  Declaration,  &c.,  giving  two  instances 
of  the  Bishops  of  Scotland  enabling  them  in  England  to  continue  a  Canoni 
cal  Succession — I1"",  two  assisting  Bishop  Hickes ;  and  2cl°,  Mr.  Doughty 
having  been  sent  to  Ed1'  for  Consecration:  branding  Bishop  Campbell  with 
Heresy  and  Schism ;  telling  of  Mr.  Gandy's  Death,  &c. 

10.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  Aprilc  4,  1734,  mentioning  Letters  from 
Bishop  Rattray  to  Bishop  Campbell,  "for  which,"  says  he,  "we  are  ex 
tremely  oblidged  to  him ;   he  has  said  what  is  abundantly  sufficient  to  per 
suade  our  dissenting  Brethren  to  unite  with  us,  &c." 

11.  (Copy)  Do.  to  Do.,  May  10,  1734,  shewing  that  the  Church  of  Eng 
land  has  a  competent  provision  for  the  Christian  Sacrifice. 

12.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  July  21,  1734,  giving  an  Account  of  Dr. 
Deacon's  new  Prayer  Book,  &c.,  and  saying,  "I  grant  our  Book  [Liturgy] 
might  be  mended  in  some  few  things,  &c." 

13.  (Holograph)   Do.   to  Do.,   Decemr.   29,   1734,   about  Mr.   Clark's 
getting  a  woman  with  child  ;   "  for  which,"  says  Mr.  Smith,  "  he  ought  never 
to  have  been  in  Orders ;  for  being  guilty  of  what  deserves  Deprivation,  he 
can't  Canonically  be  Ordained ;    and  if  he  is   Ordained,  ought  not  to  be 
suffered  to  perform  the  Office  of  a  Priest,  &c." 


ROBERT  KEITH.  195 

It.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Smith  to  Bishop  Keith,  Janry.  81,  1734-5, 
condoling  upon  Bishop  Gillan's  Death,  and  declaring  Mr.  Clark,  or  any  man 
guilty  of  fornication,  incapable  of  Holy  Orders. 

15.  (Prima  Cura,  in  his  own  hand)  Bishop  Keith's  Answer,  Aprile  12, 
1735,  to  ye  precccding  of  Janry.  81. 

10.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Smith  to  Bishop  Keith,  Aprile  18,  1735, 
declaring  the  Bishops  in  England  will  not  stretch  beyond  their  line  in 
meddling  in  Scottish  affairs. 

17.  (Original)  Do.  to  Do.,  Febry.  8,  1730,  congratulatory  upon  Bishop 
White's  Promotion ;  and  saying  that  ho  had  been  reading  Burnet's  History 
of  his  own  times,  and  found  him  what  he  always  took  him  for,  a  rank  Pres 
byterian. 

18.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  July  15,  1730,  highly  commending  Bishop 
Keith  and  his  History,  kc.     "Such  a  Book,"  says  he,  "will  stand  the  test 
of  ages,  and  will  always  be  valued,  because  110  fact  is  related  but  upon  the 
best  authority,  &c." 

19.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  Scptr.  17,  1737,  wherein  "I  asurc  you  I 
set  a  great  value  upon  your  Correspondence  and  Friendship,  &c.,"  and  that 
Bishop  Mawman  had  been  Consecrated  in  preceding  July. 

20.  (Holograph)  Do.   to  Do.,    Septemr.   4,   1738,   wherein  a   Copy  of 
Bishop  Campbell's  Act  of  Consecration,  and  requesting  the  Scottish  Bishops 
to  keep  a  Register  of  these  Acts  of  Consecration. 

21.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,   Janry.   20,  1738-9,  proposing,  with  all 
respect  and  humility,  the  use  of  the  English  Liturgy  onbj  in  Scotland,  and 
useing  several  arguments  for  that  purpose,  &c.;    but  declaring,  if  the  pro 
posal  docs  not  take,  he  shall  not  be  at  all  discontented  about  it ;  for  yl  the 
Church  of  Scotland,  being  a  National  and  Independent  Church,  has  an  un 
doubted  right  and  authority  to  use  a  different  Service  Book,  &c. ;  with  Bishop 
Keith's  Answer  (Feby.  15, 1739)  tacked  to  it,  that  the  proposal  being  a  matter 
which  concerns  the  other  Bishops,  he  could  not  well  declare  his  opinion  till 
he  had  theirs,  &c. 

22.  (Holograph)    Do.  to  Do.  (Febry.  23,   1739),   promising  never  to 
pretend  to  intermeddle  in  Scots  affairs  any  other  way  than  by  counsel  and 
advice,  &c. 

23.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  Septemr.  27,  1739,  heartily  acquiescing 
in  the  Resolution  of  the  Scottish  Bishops  not  to  enjoin  the  use  of  the  Eng 
lish  Liturgy  only,  but  to  leave  it  and  the  Scottish  on  an  equal  footing,  as  in 
ye  Concordate,  1731 ;  "uniformity  with  iis,"  says  he,  "not  being  necessary 
at  all." 

24.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  March  30, 1739,  strong  and  pointed  against 
intermeddling  in  the  affairs  of  another  Province,  which  he  terms  "  a  vile  and 
wicked  thing,"  particularly  in  that  of  Consecration  of  a  Bishop,  &c.,  together 
with  a  Copy  tacked  to  it  of  that  Letter,  March  24,  1739,  from  Bishop  Keith, 
concerning  the  Consecration  to  be  of  Mr.  Ogilvie,  which  occasioned  said 
Letter  from  Bishop  Smith. 


190  .DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

25.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  Novenir.  29,  17-10,  wishing  the  English 
Liturgy  had  not  been  altered  from  what  it  was  at  the  first  composure  in  K. 
Edward  Gth's  time;  "it  would,  I  assure  you,"  says  he,  "have  pleased  me 
better." 

2i>.  (Holograph)  Do.  to  Do.,  July  7th,  17-13,  sincerely  condoling  the 
Death  of  Bishop  It  at  tray,  and  highly  commending  the  Design  of  Publishing 
St.  James's  Liturgy,  and  promising  his  assistance.  Herein  he  is  a  favourer 
or  defender  of  Lay  Baptism,  in  the  cases  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hcwctt,  in  New 
castle,  &c. 

27.  (Two  Holographs)  Septcmr.  10,  &c.,  1718,  Bishop  Keith  his  Account 
of  a  conversation  between  himself  and  Bishop  Smith  of  England  in  Ed1',  con 
cerning  the  Deposition  of  Mr.  Fife  in  Dundee  by  Bishop  Haiti. 

28.  (Holograph  and  Copy)  Bishop  Smith  his  very  long  Letter  to  Bishop 
Keith,  Odor.  9,  17-13,  concerning'   Mr.  Fife's  Deposition;   owns  that  Fife's 
intrusion  was  an  act  highly  provoking  and  schismatical,  and  deserving  the 
highest  censure  ;   but,  considering  the  number  concerned,  better  a  milder 
course  had  been  taken,  &c.     Bishop  Haiti  sufficiently  provock'd  to  take  the 
severest  course.     Bishop  S.  still  acknowledges  the  Scottish  Book  to  be  pre 
ferable  to  the  English,  and  yet  would  abolish  the  former  and  entirely  estab 
lish  the  latter  in  Scotland,  as  a  happy  expedient  for  peace  and  quiet,  &c. 

29.  Several  Copies  of  Bishop  Keith's  short  and  pertinent  Answer,  Deer. 
13,  17-13,  to  ye  forsaid  very  long  Letter  from  Bishop  Smith  ;   that  it  is  the 
opinion  of  the  Bishops  of  Scotland  not  to  go  into  Bishop  Smith's  proposal  of 
laying  the  Scottish  aside,  and  assuming  the  English  Liturgy  in  its  place, 
nothing  being  more  imprudent,  as  there  arc  about  125  Presbyters  in  Scot 
land,  and  not  5  without  Edr  who  minister  by  the  English  Liturgy,  and  not 
above  3  in  Ed1'  who  minister  by  it  without  addition  or  transposition ;  and 
then  refers  to  Bishop  Smith's  own  judgment  Avhat  he  would  find  advisable 
to  be  done  in  a  like  case  ;  that  differences  arise  from  other  sources,  £c.     As 
to  the  affair  of  Dundee,  he  will  not  enter  any  more  into  that,  but  refers 
Bishop  Smith  to  Bishop  Ftaitt  for  better  information ;  and  yl  Mr.  Fife  never 
received  any  molestation  upon  account  of  using  the  English  Liturgy,  which 
he  might  have   still  used  to  the  day  of  his  Death  in  a  regular  manner. 
Some  small  difference  in  the  conversation  in  Edinr,  a  Copy  of  which  trans 
mitted  at  same  time  to  Bishop  Smith. 

80.  (Copy)  Mr.  Ilobert  Lyon  to  Bishop  Gordoun,  Octor.  31,  1713,  con 
cerning  the  use  of  the  two  Liturgies  in  Scotland  on  an  equal  footing ;  that 
no  Liturgy,  thu  written  (as  Bishop  Smith  says)  with  the  pen  of  Angel, 
would  have  done  in  Scotland  in  K.  Charles  Ist's  days ;  that  very  few  in 
Scotland  use  the  English  Communion  Office  AY' out  variation;  that  some  use 
110  Liturgy  at  all,  &c.  Never  did  the  Bishops  in  Scotland,  by  any  overt  act, 
condemn  the  use  of  the  English  Liturgy  in  any  shape  ;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
allow  the  English,  as  to  point  of  authority,  to  stand  upon  an  equal  footing 
\vith  their  own  Liturgy,  &c. ;  eiyo,  surprized  at  Mr.  Smith's  saying  otherwise. 

31.    (Holograph)    To   Bishop   Keith,  Bishop   Smith's   short  but   very 


ROBERT  KE1T1I.  197 

magisterial  Letter,  June  4,  1744,  owning  receipts  of  Papers,  viz.,  excerpts 
out  of  his  own  Letters,  and  insisting  upon  a  close  adherence  to  an 
Ecclesiastical  Constitution,  and  that  proposals  of  Peace  are  to  be  tendered 
from  him  and  his  Colleagues  to  the  Scottish  Bishops. 

82.  (Copy)  Bishop  Smith  to  Mr.  Andrew  Gerard,  June  -J,  1744,  pro 
testing,  in  name  of  himself  and  his  Colleagues,  against  all  Consecrations  of 
Bishops  in  Scotland,  hut  by  cither  English  or  Scottish  authorized  form ; 
and  to  do  otherwise  is  310  less  than  schism,  &c.  ! 

Xiiailii'i'  13  /;)  Jjixhoji  ]'\ir</cx'  (Jutidnijnc. 

1.  Letter  of  Bishop  Keith,  July  12,  17-14,  in  his  own  Holograph,  to  ye 
other  Bishops  of  Scotland,  concerning  proposals  of  Peace  (already  mentioned) 
by  Bishop  Smith,  of  England,  June  2G,  1744,  to  yc  Bishops  of  Scotland  ; 
that  Bishop  Smith  has  talked  of  late  in  such  a  magisterial  strain — "  You 
ought,"  "you  should,"  "you  must,"  &c. — and  w'  such  an  air  of  superiority, 
as  if  all  in  Scotland  were  his  petty  suffragans,  &c.;  that  he  now  sees  his 
error,   and  acknowledges  it,  in  corresponding   at  all  with  Bishop  Smith, 
contrary  to  yc  advice  of  Bishop  Puittray,  who  always  suspected  him  to  be  a 
dangerous  man,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 

2.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Smith's  long  Letter  to  Bishop  Keith,  with  two 
Copies  of  it  (June  20,  1744)  longer  than  the  very  long  one  mentioned  in  28 
of  Number  12. — N.B.  This  important  Letter,  given  in  full,  will  be  found  at 
p.  200. 

8.  Several  Copies  of  said  Excerpts,  &c.,  as  sent  by  Bishop  Keith  to 
Bishop  Smith  for  the  refreshment  of  his  memory.  Originals  in  Number  12. 

4.  (Copy)  Bishop  Smith  to  Mr.  John  Mackenzie,  Aprile  2,  1744,  dog 
matically  affirming  that  the  Bishops  have  no  authority  during  the  Vacancy 
of  Edr  to  encroach  upon  that  Bishoprick,  &c.,  assigning  two  reasons  why 
Canons  of  Synod,  1743,  in  his  opinion,  are  not  binding,  &c.     "We  must 
desire,"  says  lie,  "that  they  [the  Bishops]  will,  with  all  convenient  speed, 
permit  the  Presbyters  of  Edr  to  proceed  to  a  new  Election,  &c. ;   the  sup 
posed  genuine  Liturgy  of  S.  James,  &c. ;  the  sole  use  of  the  English  Office, 
without  addition,  transposition,  or  diminution,  wc':i  is  the  only  Office  has  any 
title  to  an  Establishment  among  you  ; — universally  received  among  you,  a3id 
had  the  first  settlement  in  your  Church,  &c.; — by  the  English  Office,  all 
their  Clergy  [Scots]  have  been  Ordained  ever  since  the  restitution  of  Epis 
copacy,  &c. ; — I  still  look  upon  Mr.  Fife  as  a  Presbyter  of  our  Communion, 
&c.,  &c.,  etc.!!!" 

5.  (Copy)  Bishop  Keith  to  Bishop  Smith,  May  22,  1744,  upon  seeing 
Bishop  Smith's  said  surprizing  Letter  to  Mr.  John  Mackenzie,  of  Aprile  2 ; 
that  yc  suppositions  framed  by  Bishop  Smith,  of  Synod  1743,  are  altogether 
groundless ;  110  alteration  intended  in  the  Public  Worship ;   even  the  sedi 
tious  of  Edr  will  not  venture  to  declare  solemnly  that  ye  two  Liturgies,  Eng. 
and  Scot.,  are  the  true  cause  of  their  quarrel  with  us  ;  as  they,  all  and  every 
one  of  them,  have  admiuistred  the  Holy  Eucharist  by  the  Scots  Liturgy 


198  DISTPJCT  OF  FIFE. 

only,  or  by  some  addition,  diminution,  or  transposition  in  the  English,  and 
this  of  their  own  accord,  Ac.  No  person  has  suffered  the  smallest  frown  for 
using  the  English  Liturgy  ;  that  Bishop  Keith  has  in  possession  just  now 
an  Original  Act  of  Ordination,  performed  at  Ed1',  1080,  xccitmlinii  rit/uii  ct 
»i»rciii  l-'.ccl,'xi<i'  Sciitic/nur,  which  he  is  to  put  into  yc  lioyal  Register,  &c. 

0.  (Copy)  Bishop  Dunbar  to  Bishop  Keith,  May  20.  174.1,  declaring  his 
opinion  of  Bishop  Smith's  iirst  long  Letter  of  Odor.  9,  1713,  proposing  a 
public  Declaration,  and  giving  the  heads  thereof,  both  from  Bishops  and 
Presbyters. 

7.  (Copy)  Bishop  Alexander  to  Bishop  Keith,  May  20,  17-1-J,  immedi 
ately  after  seeing  Bishop  Smith's  astonishing  Letter  to  Mr.  John  M'Kenzie 
of  Aprile  2.     See  above,  particularly  that  he  [B.  A.]  had  offered  to  recall  Mr. 
Fife  to  his  former  Charge,  there  to  use  the  English  Liturgy  as  formerly,  and 
proposed  to  the  Dundee  gentlemen  to  pitch  upon  any  other  who  would 
officiate  by  the  English  Ollice.  &c. 

8.  Copy  of  a  Letter,  in  2S  pages  4to,  anonymous  and  without  Date,  but 
strong  and  pointed,  and  appears  to  be  from  Bishop  Alexander  to  Bishop 
Keith,  reviewing  the  conduct  of  Bishop  Smith   as  to   Scots   affairs,  upon 
seeing  Bishop  Smith's  extraordinary  Letter  to  Mr.  John  Mackenzie,  ut  (into/. 

9.  Draught,  in  the  handwriting  of  Bishop  Falconar,  of  a  Paper  (June 
1,  174  U,  by  the  Clergy  of  Murray,  against  the  Usurpation  and  Intrusions  of 
Bishop  Smith,  as  contained  in  his  Letter  to  Mr.  John  Mackenzie,  in  a  Letter 
from  Bishop  Falconar  to  Bishop  Keith,  Augt.  10,  1744.     X.B. — Said  Paper 
had  been  drawn  clean  out,  and  Subscribed  by  said  Clergy,  but  was  unluckily 
miscarried  in  its  way  to  Edinr,  and  was  never  recovered. 

10.  (Prima  Cura,  in  his  own  hand)  Bishop  Keith  to  Bishop  Smith, 
particularly  anent  Mr.  Harper,  Senior,  his  affair  with  a  certain  Lady,  July 
14,  1744. 

11.  (Holograph)  Bishop   Smith's  Answer  to  Bishop  Keith,   July  19, 
1744,  still  upon  yc  matter  much  the  same,  and  in  the  old  tune. 

12.  (Prima  Cura,  in  his  own  hand)  Bishop  Keith  to  Bishop   Smith, 
Augt.    11,   1744,  of  another  Letter,  particularly  and  minutely  ancnt  Mr. 
Harper's  affair,  ?//  siifini. 

IB.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Smith  to  Bishop  Keith,  Augt.  21,  1744,  where 
in  he  acknowledges  Bishop  Keith  to  have  given  strong  evidence  against  Mr. 
Harper,  which  he  is  sorry  to  see,  &c. ;  but  as  to  other  things,  still  as  peremp 
tory  and  stiff  as  ever.  To  this  Letter  Bishop  Keith  gave  no  return. 

14.  (Holograph)  Bishop  Smith  to  Bishop  Keith,   Septemr.   10,   1744, 
calling  all  the  Scottish  Bishops  schismaticks,  and  threatning  to  Print,  with 
Copy  of  Bishop  Keith's  Answer,   Septemr.   15,   1744  ;   that  he  knows  his 
character  better  as  a  gentleman  and  a  Bishop  than  to  repay  him  in  kind, 
and  desiring  him  to  address  no  more  Letters  to  him,  for  he  will  not  relieve 
them  out  of  the  Post  Office  ;  and  very  easie  whether  he  Prints  or  not. 

15.  Two  Copies  of  a  Declaration,  Aprile  7,  1744,  sent  into  England  by 
Bishop  Keith  about  an  intention,  falsely  spread,  of  introducing  Litutyia 


ROBERT  KEITH.  199 

Jncoli  into  the  public  Worship.     Both   Copies  authenticated  by  Bishop 
Keith's  own  manual  corrections. 

10.  Copies  of  three  most  excellent  Letters — 1,  one  to  Bishop  Smith, 
June  14,  1744  ;  2,  one  to  Sir  Robert  Cotton,  June  4,  1741 ;  and  8,  to  some 
one  friend  or  other  (perhaps  Thomas  Bowdler,  Esqr.),  June  17,  1744,  all  by 
Mr.  (afterwards  Sir)  John  Cotton,  concerning  Bishop  Smith's  angry  and 
turbulent  intermeddling^  in  Scottish  affairs. 

17.  (In  the  handwriting  of  Bishop  Alexander)  A  true  Narrative  of  what 
passed  at  Dundee,  relating  to  the  Conference  'twixt  two  of  the  Bishops  and 
two  gentlemen  of  the  Sea-gate  fleeting,  Augt.  31,  1743. 

18.  Copy,  in  Shorthand  of  Bishop  Keith,  of  part  of  a  Letter  from  Mr. 
Hary  Edgar  to  Mr.  Robert  Lyon,  July  4,  1745,  concerning  the  woeful  affair 
of  Mr.  D.  Eife,  and  the  Minutes  of  Synod,  1743. 

19.  Two  Copies  of  a  Letter,  Bishop  Smith  to  Mr.  D.  Eife,  after  Deposi 
tion,  Septemr.  13,  1744,  owning  him  still  as  a  Clergyman  ;  all  whose  hearers 
(about  3  or  4  cxceptcd)  called  a  qualified  Clergyman  after  the  Troubles  in 
174(5 ! 

20.  (Copies)  Mr.  (afterwards   Sir)   John  Cotton  to   Mr.  Robert  Lyon 
(most  excellent),  Octor.  15,  1744,  anent  "  Mr.  Smith's  last  violent  Letter  to 
Bishop  Keith,  in  which  grieved  at  Mr.  Smith's  resolution  to  Print ;  that  he 
seems  blinded  with  passion  ;  and  giving  the  substance  of  a  Letter  he  (Mr. 
Cotton)  had  written  to  Bishop  Gordoun  upon  the  subject — viz.,  the  fatal 
effects  of  Printing,  which  gives  the  Romish  Emissaries  a  handle  to  draw  off 
persons,  by  charging  us  with  being  a  Parliamentary  Church,  as  they  did 
before,  assigning  the  true  reason  for  refusing  the  Primitive  Usages  to  be 
(whatever  else  might  be  pretended)  the  supposed  want  of  power  to  alter  any 
thing  settled  by  Parliament,  £c.     Then  the  usclessness  of  Printing  at  any 
rate,  as  proceeding  from  vanity,  &c.     He  then  informs  he  had  got  a  most 
agreeable  Answer  from  Mr.  Gordoun,  &c.,  to  which  he  had  made  a  Reply, 
that  it  was  a  very  difficult  point  to  decide  how  far  the  coalition  of  the  Civil 
and  Ecclesiastical  Power  could  bind  Bishops  from  exerting  Powers  allowed 
to  be  in  them,  when  for  the  good  of  the  Church  ;  for  that  ye  ancient  Bishops, 
makeing  Constantino  a  land  of  Supreme  Ordinary,  proved  of  fatal  conse 
quence  to  ye  Church ;  and  that  had  the  Bishop  of  Alexandria  been  allowed 
to  censure  his  own  Presbyter  Arius,  that  Heresy  had  been  stop'd  at  once  ; 
but  appeals  to  the  Emperor,  and  intcrmcddlings  of  Courtiers,  made  that 
Heresy  take  deep  roots,  &c.     At  last  the  notion  of  two  independent  powers 
became  in  a  manner  lost,  etc.;  so  that  the  Romish  Bishops,  instead  of  en 
deavouring  to  resume  their  just  rights,  gave  up  all  the  power  of  the  Church 
to  Henry  8.,  under  the  blasphemous  Title  of  Head  of  the  Church. — Queen 
Elizabeth  seemed  to  give  up  those  powers ;  but  then  the  Court  of  Delegates 
(the  last  resort)  may  be  Laymen,  &c. — Under  so  good  and  pious  a  King  as 
Charles  1st,  this  might  have  been  remedied,  and  the  Church  restored  to  its 
Rights  ;    but  the  Bishops,  thu  good  and  great  men,  finding  him  ready  to 
support  the  Church,  exalted  his  power  to  such  a  degree,  that  there  are  to  be 


200  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

seen  Printed,  with  approbation  at  the  end  of  Archbishop  Laiid's  Life,  Letters 
of  King  Charles  1,  written  with  the  air  and  stile  of  a  Supreme  Ordinary, 
demanding  an  Account  of  the  Bishops  of  the  Government  of  their  Dioceses, 
&c.  It  looks  extremely  odd  for  one  of  the  Flock  to  undertake  to  govern  the 
Shepherds.  K.  James  2  set  up  an  High  Commission  Court,  and  named 
Archbishop  Bancroft  one  of  tlie  Commissioners,  who  refused  to  act,  saying 
the  whole  power  given  that  Court  was  already  in  him  as  Archbishop.  Had 
he  gone  farther,  and  forbid  his  Suffragans  to  act  there,  he  might  have  been 
guilty  of  '  jii'tnin/iiii'i' ;'  but  would  he  have  been  guilty  of  Schism'?  Would 
that  have  justified  the  Scots  Bishops  to  have  broken  Communion  with  him '? 
&e.  Suppose  that  by  prorogations,  Convocations  are  hindered  from  sitting, 
and  that  the  Bishops  thought  it  their  duty  to  sit,  and  actually  do,  they  are 
certainly  guilty  of  '  jmciimnin' ;'  but  can  it  be  said  they  are  guilty  of 
Schism,  or  that  it  would  be  lawful  to  break  Communion  with  them  ?  In 
Scotland  the  breaking  off  from  Home  was  in  a  tumultuous  manner ;  and 
when  King  James  1  settled  Episcopacy,  Scotland  was  so  much  inclined  to 
Presbytery  that  he  rather  did  what  he  could  than  what  he  wished  to  do. 
Even  the  Act  of  Parliament  in  K.  Charles  2d's  lleign,  which  Bishop  Smith 
builds  upon,  was  rather  a  temporary  expedient  to  prevent  a  National  Pres 
byterian-like  Assembly,  than  a  iixed  settlement  of  the  Church.  And  now 
that  Presbytery  nourishes,  and  the  Church  is  in  distress,  and  the  people 
have  juster  notions  of  Church  Government,  can  the  Bishops  be  guilty  of 
Schism  for  exerting  some  powers  for  the  good  of  the  Church,  &c.  ?  I  dare 
say  misrepresentations  have  not  been  made  of  Mr.  Smith,  but  to  him,  &c." 

21.  (Copy)  Bishop  Smith,  Xovr.  1'2,  17-1-1,  to  Mr.  David  Fife,  Deposed 
Clergyman  in  Dundee,  wherein  that  ye  Bishops  of  Scotland  are  guilty  of 
Perjury,  Schism,  and  lic-bellion,  and  therefore  not  rightful  Bishops,  and  no 
Confirmation  to  he  asked  of  them,  &c. 

BISHOP   SMITH'S   LETTER  TO  BISHOP  KEITH. 

Referred  to  in  '2  of  Number  IX. 

Pi.  Pi.  BR., — It  is  great  grief  and  vexation  to  me  that  I  should  have  the 
misfortune  to  be  engaged  in  a  dispute  wl  you  and  my  oyr  Colleagues  in 
Scotland.  But  in  my  judgement  and  conscience  I'm  persuaded  your  late 
proceedings  can  by  no  means  be  justify'd;  and  since  I  was  called  upon  to 
give  my  opinion  of  ym,  I  think  I  am  not  much  to  be  blamed  if  I  did  it  w'L  a 
freedom  w''h  the  occasion  scein'd  to  me  to  require.  I  must  confess  I  am  still 
much  of  ye  same  mind  I  was  before,  and  see  no  convincing  reasons  to  alter 
my  sentiments  in  the  Papers  you  were  plcas'd  to  send  me,  wrh  I  shall  now 
give  you  my  sense  of  in  the  clearest  manner  I  can.  I  have  no  Copies  of  my 
Letters  except  of  the  last  I  sent  you,  and  y  not  perfect ;  but  doubt  not  ye 
several  particulars  you  have  extracted  from  y"1  are  faithfully  Transcrib'd ; 
and  having  carefully  consider'd  y"1,  I  cannot  understand  of  what  use  they 
will  be  to  your  cause,  and  how  I  now  act  inconsistently  wrt  q(  I  have  there 
said  when  ye  matter  is  thoroughly  examined,  ye  case,  in  my-  apprehension, 
being  much  alter'd  from  ql  it  was  when  most  of  those  Letters  were  written. 
As  to  the  passages  about  the  Union  which  was  made  here,  they  can  be 


EOBEET  KEITH.  201 

nothing  to  the  purpose  ;  for  we  made  no  new  Canons,  or  Offices,  or  Kubricks. 
We  did  nothing  contrary  to  the  Laws  either  of  our  Church  or  State,  but 
agreed  to  what  was  perfectly  conformable  to  ym.  We  did  not  attempt  to 
alter  one  word  in  our  Office  ;  and  since  mix'd  Wine  is  Wine,  as  well  as 
unmix'd,  the  placing  Wine  beforehand  privately  mix'd  upon  ye  II.  Table  Tlie  Mixed 
cannot  be  repugnant  to  the  Kubrick,  which  prescribes  placing  Wine  there.  Cup' 
And  the  last  clause  of  ye  Preface  to  ye  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  giving  ye 
Bishops  power  to  interpret  ye  Kubricks,  and  put  an  end  to  all  doubts  and 
disputes  about  them,  by  taking  Order  for  ye  quieting  and  appeasing  the 
same,  so  that  the  same  Order  be  not  contrary  to  anything  contaiii'd  in  ye 
Liturgy.  We  did  no  more  than  use  our  just  power,  and  interpreted  the 
Kubrick  to  mean  mixt  as  well  as  pure  Wine,  as  many  other  Bishops  and 
Divines  of  our  Church  had  done  before  us.  We  have  thus  kept  w'iu  the  due 
bounds  of  Law,  and  unless  you  can  shew  yl  you  have  done  the  same  in  your 
late  proceedings — which  I  am  confident  you  cannot — it  is  very  easy  to'  dis 
cern  your  case  and  ours  are  not  paralel.  We  have  not  in  this  affair  departed 
one  hairsbreadth  from  ye  Constitution  of  our  Church  ;  we  have  exercised  no 
power  but  what  y1  has  given  us  ;  and  if  you  had  acted  in  the  same  cautious 
manner,  it  had  been  much  happier  both  for  yourselves  and  the  Church. 
When  I  say  y1  ye  Bishops  of  the  Ch.  of  Eng.  have  the  sole  right  over  the 
Discipline  thereof,  I  don't  mean  they  have  the  sole  right  to  make  new  Canons 
about  Discipline,  or  new  Offices  or  Kubricks  ;  for  I  know  very  Avell  yl  such 
things  can't  be  done  but  in  ye  two  full  Provincial  Convocations,  composed  Provincial 
as  well  of  certain  Presbyters  as  Bishops,  and  that  when  once  such  things  are  Convocations, 
establish'd  by  this  full  authority,  no  lesser  authority  can  alter  them.  And 
this  was  the  very  reason  we  gave  why  we  could  not  admit  the  least  altera 
tions  in  the  Communion  Office,  when  those  who  Averc  for  the  Usages 
requir'd  it  of  us.  All  I  meant  by  yl  expression  was,  yl  by  the  Laws  of  our 
Ch.  ye  Bishops  have  the  sole  right  of  interpreting  ye  Kubricks  already  made, 
and  of  directing  the  execution  of  ye  Canons  already  settled  ;  and  that  all  ye 
inferiours  are  to  pay  a  due  obedience  to  such  lawfull  directions.  If,  there 
fore,  some  Presbyters  of  ye  Ch.  of  Eng.  would  not  allow  ye  Bishops  in  all 
such  matters  an  authority  over  ym,  it  can't  be  denied  yl  it  look'd  very  like 
setting  up  for  ymselves,  and  advancing  themselves  to  be  either  above,  'or  at 
least  equal,  to  their  Bishops. 

Well,  what  of  all  this  ?  Will  it  follow  y1  ye  Bishops  way  assume  the 
sole  right  of  doing  things,  when  ye  Laws -of  ye  Ch.  in  certain  cases  have 
enjoin'd  they  must  have  ye  concurrence  of  Presbyters  ?  Will  it  follow  y'  ye 
Bishops  alone  can  make  new  Canons  and  compose  new  Church  Offices,  or  Bishops  have 
do  even  any  act  of  Discipline,  when  the  Constitution  of  your  Ch.  gainsays  no  sole  rights- 
and  directs  they  shall  have  ye  consent  of  some  Presbyters  ?  In  some  Ch. 
ye  inferiour  Clergy  have  more  privileges  than  in  others,  and  particularly 
they  have  more  in  Scot,  than  in  Eng. ;  because  the  Bishops  there  can  do  no 
momentuous  act  of  Jurisdiction  without  them.  Now,  it  was  never  my 
intention  to  say  anything  ag'  the  Canonical  and  Legal  Rights  of  Presbyters  : 
this  is  what  I  ara  very  sure  I  never  so  much  as  dreamt  of.  All  I  design'd 
was  to  speak  against  Presbyters  assuming  liberties  to  themselves  which  ye 
Law  had  not  given  them  ;  which  you  can't  pretend  to  be  the  case  of  those 
Presbyters  who  now  oppose  you ;  and  therefore  unless  you  can  prove  y*  ye 
Presbyters  of  Scot,  refuse  to  obey  the  authority  of  ye  Bishops,  exerted 
according  to  ye  Laws,  it  is  in  vain  to  imagine  that  they  are  now  in  rebellion 
VOL.  n.  2  c 


202 


DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 


fig4  their  right  full  superiours.  For  q"  Bishops  transgress  the  Laws  and  act 
agf  ye  superiour  autliority  y'  made  y"1,  in  yl  case  they  cease  to  have  any 
authority — the  greater  and  higher  authority  of  a  National  Synod,  ratified  by 
ye  Prince,  invalidating  the  lesser  and  inferiour  authority,  proceeding  con 
trary  to  it  ;  and  consequently  they  are  not  ye  right  full  superiors,  and  all 
their  illegal  acts  are  null. 

I  was  informed  both  by  Mr.  Clillan  and  you  y'  some  of  your  Presbyters 
were  raising  disturbances  in  your  Ch.,  ag1  ye  just  and  lawful!  autliority  of  ye 
Bishops,  who  had.  as  I  presumed,  done  nothing  repugnant  to  ye  Laws  either 
of  your  Church  or  State.  I  relied  entirely  upon  your  testimony  in  y1  matter, 

Mr.  Gillan  and  as  being  both  of  you  persons  whom  I  doubted  not  I  could  very  well  trust. 

others.  Yov  this  I  scrupled  not  to  condemn  all  such  schismatical  practices;   and 

upon  your  intimation  that  there  was  a  design  to  desire  me  to  concur  in  the 
Consecration  of  a  Bishop,  in  order  to  promote  such  schismatical  purposes 
(an  overture  which  yet  was  never  made  to  me  or  any  oyr  of  my  Colleagues, 
that  I  know  of),  I  gave  you  assurances  y'  none  of  us  would  ever  come  into 
such  unwarrantable  measures,  upon  supposition  y"  that  you  adher'd  strictly 
to  your  Constitution,  as  I  hop'd  and  then  believed  you  did.  I  told  you  we 
knew  our  duty  better  than  to  stretch  ourselves  beyond  our  measure,  or  to 
extend  our  authority  to  your  Province,  where  we  have  no  right  (that  is,  no 
ordinary  right)  to  exercise  any  Jurisdiction;  and  that  'tis  a  wicked  thing  to 
intermeddle  in  the  affairs  of  anovr  Province  w'out  the  consent  of  that  Pro 
vince,  such  a  practice  being  the  way  to  entail  perpetual  Schisms  upon  ye 
Church. 

These  were  my  sentiments  then,  and  arc  so  still.  But  ye  case  appears 
now  very  different  from  ql  I  believed  it  to  be  when  I  wrote  those  words  ;  for 
upon  your  representation  of  ye  matter,  w<h  I  gave  full  credit  to,  believing 

teUi'ngYstory.  vou  understood  your  own  Laws  better  than  I  did,  I  doubted  not  the  truth  of 
what  you  told  me,  that  some  of  ye  then  Presbyters  were  of  a  factious  dis 
position,  and  of  a  seditious  and  schismatical  humour,  and  had  no  regard  to 
yr  superiours  behaving  themselves  like  worthy  men,  and  acting  in  a  lawful 
and  regular  way.  But  those  Presbyters  who  now  desire  us  to  assist  vm,  are 
not  ye  factious  persons  who  raise  new  disturbances  ;  they  are  guilty  of  no 
designs  which  will  not  admit  of  a  clear  justification.  They  have  done  no 
more  than  to  insist  upon  y1'  Canonical  rights  and  privileges,  and  entreat  us 
to  defend  y1"  ag'  your  manifest  encroachments  upon  both ;  and,  therefore, 
tho  we  ought  not  ncaUc^/f/  to  transgress  our  line,  yet  when  we  are  called 
upon  by  persons  in  our  Communion,  who  are  oppressed  for  supporting  ye 
Laws  and  Canons  of  ye  National  Ch.,  to  defend  them  ag1  the  Bishops,  who 
are  openly,  by  yr  inauthoritative  proceedings,  overturning  ye  frame  of  it,  it 
can't  be  justly  entitled  "  needlessly  transgress  our  line,"  to  use  y1  extraordi 
nary  power  God  has  intrusted  us  wl,  in  order  to  give  some  check  to  so 
flagrant  an  usurpation  upon  ye  rights  both  of  ye  Church  and  State,  wch  we 
are  verily  persuaded  you  in  your  late  Synod  have  attempted. 

I  confess  I  was  very  much  a  stranger  to  your  Constitution,  till  I  read 
your  Minutes  and  ye  Presbyters'  Paper  ag1  them.  But  I  now  find  by  looking 
into  ye  Account  thereof  given  us  by  the  Ch.  Historians  of  both  Nations,  that 
ye  indiction  of  all  National  Synods  of  your  Ch.  belong  to  his  Majesty,  by  ye 

The  King  prerogatives  of  his  Crown,  and  all  Convocations  of  y1  kind,  without  his 
License,  are  merely  unlawful! ;  and  y1  ye  said  Assembly  shall  consist  not 
only  of  Bishops,  but  of  Deans,  Arch-deacons,  and  such  of  ye  Ministry  as 


EGBERT  KEITH.  203 

shall  be  Elected  by  ye  rest.  This  you  can't  but  know  was  Synodically 
establish'*!  by  ye  highest  Ecclesiastical  authority  in  1010,  as  appears  from 
Spotiswood's  History;  and  at  ye  restitution  of  Episcopacy  by  K.  Charles  ye 
2il,  Mr.  Collier,  p.  887,  tells  us  his  Maj-vhad  nominated  aiid  presented  Arch-  Collier- 
bishops  and  Bishops  to  yr  respective  Sees,  to  exercise  and  enjoy  the  same 
authority  with  which  ye  Prelates  governed  y*  Church  in  ye  Eeign  of  his 
Royal  grandfather  :  and,  p.  892,  he  gives  us  ye  Act  of  your  Parliament  for  ye 
establishment  of  a  National  Synod,  by  which  it  was  enacted  that  it,  for  ye 
lawfull  members  thereof,  shall  consist  of  ye  Archbishops,  Bishops,  and 
Deans,  of  Archdeacons,  Moderators  of  Meeting  for  exercise,  and  of  one  Pres 
byter  of  each  meeting,  &c. ;  that  this  Synod  is  to  meet  when  and  where  his 
Majesty  shall  appoint,  and  unless  his  Majesty  or  Commissioners  be  present, 
no  National  Assembly  shall  be  kept.  'Tis  farther  enacted  that  no  Canon, 
Order,  or  Ordinance  shall  be  own'd  as  an  Act  of  ye  National  Synod,  except 
yl  which  shall  be  agreed  upon  by  ye  President  and  major  part  of  ye  Members 
above  specitied.  This  is  ye  Law  both  of  your  Church  and  State,  which, 
Av'out  any  manner  of  necessity,  you  have  transgressed,  and  by  the  violation 
of  which  ye  principal  disturbances  have  been  occasioned.  This  is  the  Law 
which  all  their  Predecessors,  both  before  and  after  ye  Revolution,  till  a  very 
few  years  since,  have  observed,  particularly  ye  late  excellent  and  prudent 
Bishop  Ross,  who  never  set  about  to  make  new  Canons,  &c.,  but  believ'd 
it  most  for  ye  peace  of  ye  Church  to  see  to  the  execution  of  the  old.  This 
another  of  your  Countrymen,  Mr.  Sage,  who  well  understood  the  Con- Bishops  Ross 
stitution  both  of  the  Primitive  Ch.  and  of  your  own,  in  his  "Vindication,"  and  Sage. 
&c.,  p.  177,  calls  ye  only  true  and  genuine  Constitution  of  your  Ch. ;  and,  p. 
178,  he  says  that  National  Synods,  by  ye  Constitution,  consist  always  of 
Presbyters  having  definitive  voices  as  well  as  Bishops  ;  and  in  p.  319  he 
asserts  y'  by  ye  Scotish  Constitutions,  Bishops  are  limited  to  act,  with  the 
advice  and  consent  of  Presbyters,  in  making  of  Canons  and  performing 
Ordinations,  and  all  other  momentuous  acts  of  Jurisdiction ;  and,  p.  350, 
"  that  the  Scotish  Bishops  arc  limited  by  the  very  Constitution  to  do  nothing 
of  consequence  by  themselves,  and  by  consequence  there  is  not  now  y' 
hazard  of  arbitrary  Government  in  Scotl."  In  which  words  is  couch'd'a 
most  severe  reflection  upon  your  late  proceedings.  Here  we  have  ye  judge 
ment  of  ye  wisest  men  of  your  Ch.,  even  after  it  fell  into  a  persecuted  state, 
expressly  agl  you.  You  will  then  do  well  to  consider  upon  what  gixmnds 
you  will  be  able  to  vindicate  your  late  enterprises,  and  prove  them  consis 
tent  wl  your  Ecclesiastical  Constitution ;  whether  they  arc  not  a  direct 
encroachment  upon  ye  just  rights  and  privileges  competent  to  secular  powers 
in  Ch.  affairs  ;  and  whether  your  declaration  y'  you  don't  intend  to  encroach 
upon  ye  said  just  rights,  is  not  a  manifest  protestation  against  fact,  and  con 
sequently  altogether  ineffectual  to  excuse  you  from  such  encroachment. 
And  give  me  leave  to  ask  these  plain  questions  :  Can  those  be  rightfull 
Bishops,  or  even  true  Members  of  a  National  Church,  who  persist  in  thwart-  Queries 
ing  the  Constitution  of  it  ?  And  is  it  anything  less  than  Rebellion  in 
Bishops  to  persevere  in  disobeying  the  just  Laws  of  the  Land,  and  Schism 
in  acting  countre  to  ye  Constitution  of  your  National  Ch.,  and  in  raising 
factions  and  seditions  to  enforce  obedience  to  ye  inauthori/ed  Commands  ? 
This  is  what  I'm  afraid  you  will  never  be  able  to  answer. 

It  is  plain,  then,  who  those  are  yl  have  been  the  authors  of  ye  new 
disturbances  ;  who  they  are  that  forward  and  encourage  schismatical  designs, 


204  DISTEICT  OF  FIFE. 

and  are  bringing  things  to  confusion  and  ruin.  I  therefore  cannot  but 
highly  commend  those  who  courageously  stand  in  the  gap,  who  oppose  such 
desperate  courses  ;  and  I  am  clearly  of  the  same  opinion  with  the  meek  and 

Kcttlewell.  pious  Mr.  Kcttlcwell,  iii  his  Book  of  Christian  Communion  (see  his  Works, 
vol.  2,  p.  595) — "  It  is  just  ground  (says  he)  to  brake  of  from  Bishops,  if  they 
make  unrighteous  usurpations  and  encroachments  upon  ye  terms  and  condi 
tions  of  yr  Communion.  Both  Bishops  and  Churches  may  turn  tyrannical 
and  arrogant  usurpers  upon  yr  Brethren's  liberties,  not  admitting  yr  own 
Members  to  yr  Communion  without  acknowledging  and  submitting  to  their 
unjustly  and  illegally  assumed  powers.  And  when  they  will  allow  Com 
munion  to  none,  unless  they  are  content  to  purchase  it  at  such  rates,  good 
Christians  may  pass  them  by,  and  unite  themselves  to  o-r  Churches,  where 
they  will  be  more  justly  and  fairly  dealt  with.  The  Communion  of  Chris 
tians  is  a  Communion  of  Brethren  upon  brotherly  terms ;  not  of  captives 
who  must  submit  to  any  terms,  or  bear  ql  hardships  and  encroachments  are 
put  upon  them  by  their  conquerors.  They  arc  not  bound  to  purchase  unity 
by  enslaving  themselves,  or  any  Brethren's  Communion,  by  receiving  their 
yoke,  or  giving  up  their  own  rights  and  liberties."  If  then  you  still  insist 
upon  your  Clergy's  paying  obedience  to  your  illegal  Canons,  and  resolve, 
against  Law  and  Justice,  to  bind  these  fetters  close  upon  them,  as  plainly 

M'Kenzie.  appears  you  do,  from  your  Letter  to  Mr.  M'Kenzie,  and  your  late  amazing 
separation  from  him,  you  plainly  perceive  who  they  arc  that  have  already 
commenced  ye  Schism,  and  at  whose  door  all  ye  sad  consequences  of  so 
unjustifiable  a  step  must  ly.  In  such  a  case  as  this,  the  persons  aggriev'd 
have  a  right  to  seek  a  remedy  from  oyr  neighbouring  Bishops,  if  they  can't 
find  a  cure  for  their  troubles  at  home.  And  tho  it  be  true  that  no  Bishops 
ought  to  invade  the  rights  of  their  other  Brethren,  acting  in  a  regular  and 
Canonical  manner,  yet  it  is  as  true  that  all  Bishops  are  not  only  to  attend 
yc  government  of  ye  flocks  peculiarly  committed  to  their  charge,  but  ye  care 
of  the  whole  flock,  in  extraordinary  cases,  does  likewise  belong  to  ym,  when 
yc  interest  of  Iveligion  is  at  stake,  and  the  peace  of  yc  Church  broken  by 
their  Colleagues.  "For,"  as  S.  Cyprian  says,  "the  Episcopate  is  one,  part 
of  which  each  Bishop  shares,  so  as  to  have  a  right  in  ye  whole ;  and  tho  we 
are  many  Shepherds,  yet  we  feed  but  one  flock,  and  are  obliged  to  gather 
together  and  cherish  all  the  sheep  which  Christ  has  purchased  with  His 
blood  and  passion.  And  if  any  of  our  College  make  a  Schism,  and  endeavour 
to  tear  and  waste  the  flock  of  Christ,  let  ye  rest  come  in  to  yr  rescue.  If 
then  your  late  Synodical  proceedings,  so  plainly  repugnant  to  ye  Laws,  have 
occasional  a  rupture  in  your  Church,  ye  pastoral  care  being  common  to  all 
who  have  ye  oflice  of  Bishops,  it  is  our  duty  to  assist  and  support  those  who 
have  been  compelled  to  make  their  complaints  against  you  ;  and,  in  the  first 
place,  to  admonish  you  in  a  friendly  way  to  rescind  and  annul  your  too 
violent  measures,  which  we  hereby  request  and  exhort  you  to  do ;  and  if  y* 

tserious  threats  shall  not  have  the  desired  effect,  then  to  provide  for  ye  injur'd  Members  of 

of  Sclnsm.  OIU.  Communion  in  ye  best  manner  we  can.  And  if  hereby  a  Schism  is 
eutail'd  upon  ye  Ch.,  you  will  remember  that  we  are  not  the  persons  that 
cause  this  mischief,  but  you,  who  throw  off  all  love  and  regard  for  those 
faithfull  sons  of  your  Ch.  who  adhere  to  her  Constitution,  which  you  forsake 
and  do  all  you  can  to  subvert.  But  I  hope  you  will,  by  resolving  to  return 
to  your  duty,  and  to  a  dutifull  obedience  to  ye  Laws  of  your  Church,  and  to 
ye  unity  of  it,  which  you  have  violated,  make  up  the  breach.  This  is  what 


EOBEKT  KEITH.  205 

we  most  heartily  wish  and  earnestly  beg  of  you.     For,  as  it  has  been  our 
endeavour  hitherto,  so  'tis  now  by  this  present  Letter,  to  promote  peace  and  Recommen(j 
compose  your  differences  as  much  as  lies  in  our  power.     This  alone  is  what  Harmony, 
we  aim  at  by  our  interposition,  and  we  trust  the  God  of  peace  and  love  will 
so  melt  your  hearts  that  it  will  not  be  fruitless. 

In  one  of  my  Letters  to  you,  I  say  that  if  a  perfect  harmony  and  una 
nimity  among  ye  Bishops  of  Scot,  could  once  be  brought  about,  the  ill 
humours  of  their  inferiors  would  have  but  small  influence.  But  here,  good 
Sir,  I  did  not  mean  a  harmony  and  unanimity  of  any  sort  or  in  any  thing 
that  was  bad,  but  only  such  a  harmony  and  unanimity  as  was  agreeable  to, 
and  would  conspire  in  supporting,  their  Constitution.  I  little  imagin'd  such 
an  unanimity  was  endeavoured  after  as  would  entirely  unhinge  it,  as  I  with 
sorrow  find  now  to  be  the  case.  It  was  allways  my  avow'd  principle,  which 
I  have  taken  the  best  care  I  can  to  pursue,  that  Bishops  should  studiously 
adhere  to  the  Constitution  of  their  Church,  and  obey  all  the  just  Laws  of 
the  State  about  Ecclesiastical  affairs.  This  you  can't  but  know  was  the 
very  plan  upon  which  we  proceeded  in  our  late  Union.  But  you  Avill  not 
endure  your  authority  should  be  thus  shackled.  Both  Church  and  State 
must  give  way  to  it.  It  resolves  to  be  free  and  absolute,  and  will  not  *fws  an(1 
submitt  to  be  regulated  either  by  Canons  or  Laws.  But  while  it  thus  dis 
dains  to  own  any  subjection,  methinks  it  is  somewhat  unreasonable  to 
challenge  obedience  from  others,  and  loudly  to  complain  of  the  ill  humours, 
faction,  and  rebellion  of  inferiors,  who  disobey  it  on  no  other  account  but 
because  itself  is  so  ill  dispos'd  as  to  be  guilty  of  that  very  fault  which  it 
unjustly  accuses  them  of.  If  the  things  commanded  by  this  inferior 
authority  were  lawi'ull,  it  were  another  case  ;  but  how  can  they  be  lawfull 
when  they  are  clean  contrary  to  the  Laws  of  a  superior  authority — those  of 
a  National  Synod  and  of  the  Prince  ;  both  which  powers  conjoyn'd  have 
expressly  limited  the  Episcopal  authority,  so  that  it  cannot  act  in  that 
absolute  manner  which  you  with  so  much  vehemence  contend  for. 

You  insinuate  as  if  I  was  as  much  to  blame  for  setting  up  and  head 
ing  a  Communion  opposite  to  the  Bishops  in  Scotland,  as  Mr.  Campbell  was 
for  doing  so  to  the  Bishops  in  England  ;  but  still  you  rmist  prove  the 
two  cases  alike.  You  must  shew  that  the  English  Bishops,  as  you  have 
done,  made  Canons,  or  did  something  not  warranted  by  the  Laws  Ecclesi 
astical  and  Civil ;  and  that  Mr  Campbell  for  that  reason  thought  himself  ^hop  Camp- 
bound,  for  the  good  of  the  flock,  who  believ'd  it  their  duty  to  obey  those  bell  in  Eng- 
Laws,  and  consequently  to  disobey  those  Canons,  to  preserve  them  in  the  lanj> 
true  Com"  of  the  Church  of  England.  Now,  you  cannot  but  be  conscious 
the  reverse  of  this  is  the  truth  ;  and  therefore  Mr.  Campbell's  practices  will 
not  admit  of  any  defence,  unless  you  are  of  the  same  opinion  with  him,  that 
the  Church  of  England  itself  is  schismatical,  by  having,  through  some  pre 
tended  defects,  separated  itself  from  the  Primitive.  In  the  next  place,  this 
insinuation  supposes  that  there  is  in  fact  a  Communion  opposite  to  the 
Bishops  in  Scotland.  If  there  is,  then  the  question  will  be,  which  is  the 
true  Communion  there  and  which  is  the  schismatical.  Now,  this  may  easily 
be  resolv'd  by  considering  which  side  sticks  to  the  Constitution,  and  which 
has  deserted  it ;  and  then  the  result  will  be,  that  the  side  which  sticks  to  it 
must  be  the  true  Com"  of  the  National  Church,  and  that  the  other  is  an 
entirely  new,  and  consequently  a  schismatical  Church,  set  up  in  opposition 
to  the  National.  If,  then,  there  is  indeed  a  Schism,  the  Bishops  who  head 


200  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Who  MM?  this  new  Cliurch  or  Com",  and  their  adherents,  must  be  the  Schismaticks  ; 

Schismatics?  for,  as  the  learned  Dr.  Ilickes,  who  understood  the  nature  of  Church  Com" 
as  well  as  any  now  living,  says  very  pertinently,  in  his  Book  of  the  Consti 
tution  of  the  Catholic  Church,  p.  200 — "  Obedience  neither  is  nor  can  he 
due  to  Bishops  which  overthwart  the  local  Customs  and  Constitutions  of  the 
places  where  they  pretend  to  he  Bishops."  AYhat,  then,  must  the  true 
and  faithfull  [Members  of  a  National  Cliurch  do,  who,  through  the  defection 
of  all  their  Bishops  from  the  Com11  of  it,  are  deserted  by  them,  and  arc  left, 
as  it  were,  in  a  state  of  widowhood '?  Most  certainly  they  have  no  other 
choice  left  but  to  apply  to  other  Bishops  of  their  Com"  to  aid  them  in  their 
calamitous  circumstances.  Their  own  Bishops,  by  becoming  s/w^/ym  to  the 
Constitution  of  their  Cliurch,  are  become  strangers  to  them,  whose  call  and 
voices  they  arc  not  bound  to  hear;  and  therefore  they  naturally  come  under 
the  more  immediate  care  of  other  Bishops  of  the  same  Com",  who,  thu  they 
are  strangers  in  a  Civil,  yet  arc  not  so  in  an  Ecclesiastical  sense,  in  a  case 

Ddfenc^of1*11'8  °*'  tn^s  imturo-     ^5ut  WG  iiave  n°t  yet  headed  a  Com"  opposite  to  yours.     AYc 

his  throat.  »rc  willing  to  hope  you  will  return  to  the  same  Com"  your  Predecessors  were 
of.  and  will  not  finally  It  ave  it .  We  wish  you  to  reform  your  past  mistakes, 
and  then  we  shall  with  joy  and  all  fraternal  affection  again  acknowledge  you 
to  be  true  and  lawful  Bishops  of  the  Church  of  Scotland;  otherwise  our 
heading  those  of  our  Com"  among  you  will  at  length  become  absolutely 
necessary,  and  will  not  be  a  crime  but  a  duty ;  and  this  in  the  case  now 
before  us  will  not  be  stretching  ourselves  beyond  our  measure,  or  needlessly 
transgressing  our  line.  For  upon  such  an  occasion,  when  the  quiet  of  the 
Church  is  disturbed  and  its  unity  broke,  we,  as  Catholick  Bishops,  ought  to 
administer  comfort  and  succour  to  the  Flock  committed  in  common  to  us, 
which  is  left  without  lawfull  Shepherds,  and  implores  our  help  against  those 
who  seek  to  enslave  it.  To  act  thus  is  not  to  act  anything  against  just 
authority,  but  against  an  usurp'd  power,  against  rebellious  and  schismatical 
practices,  against  a  violation  of  the  Laws  both  of  Church  and  State,  against 
an  invasion  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  your  Brethren — things  you  will 
never  be  able  to  clear  yourselves  of;  which,  therefore,  I  heartily  pray  to 
God,  that  both  for  your  own  and  your  Church's  benelite,  you  may  speedily 
ammend. 

You  tell  me  that  in  one  of  my  Letters,  I  applaud  everything  done  in 

Synod  of  1";»S.  your  Synod  in  17i>8.  AYhat  was  done  there  I  don't  remember,  neither 
'have  I  the  Minutes  to  consult.  If  there  were  any  new  Canons  made  by  the 
Bishops  alone,  however  I  might  applaud  them  then,  when  I  had,  I  own,  a 
very  lame  and  imperfect  notion  of  your  Constitution,  and  charitably  imagin'd 
the  Bishops  would  never  attempt  to  break  the  laws  of  it — I  give  it  you  under 
my  hand  that  I  utterly  disapprove  of  them  now,  being  clearly  convinc'd  you 
have  no  more  authority  than  we  in  that  particular,  which  is  none  at  all. 
The  Bishops  of  the  Church  of  England,  during  the  time  of  the  Picbellion,  in 
the  Pieign  of  K.  C.,  etc.,  when  they  were  under  much  greater  distress  than 
the  Bishops  of  Scotland  have  been  for  many  years,  did  not  think  themselves 
at  liberty  to  do  any  thing  contrary  to  the  Laws  still  in  force,  notwithstand 
ing  their  Repeal  by  the  usurping  powers;  and  the  Bishops  of  the  same  Cli., 
who  have  followed  their  example  since  the  Revolution,  have  all  along 
believ'd  the  Laws  both  of  Church  and  State  still  retain  their  power  of  oblig 
ing  the  conscience.  The  same  may  be  said  of  your  own  Bishops  who  were 
ejected  in  K.  "Wm.'s  time ;  and  how  you  came  to  fancy  you  are  delivered 


EOBEET  KEITH.  207 

from  this  obligation  is,  I  confess,  beyond  my  comprehension.  Bishops  arc 
undoubtedly  subjects  as  well  as  other  men,  and  they  ought  not  to  infringe 
what  has  been  regularly  establish'd  both  in  Synod  and  by  the  Laws  of  the 
State  confirming  the  Synodical  decrees  ;  and  the  Commission  they  have 
received  from  Christ  will  not  warrant  them  to  contravcen  such  superior 
authority,  unless  they  can  shew  that  such  an  establishment  is  contrary  to  Extempore 
the  Laws  of  God.  or  that  some  urgent  necessity  requires  something  extra-  Prayers, 
ordinary  should  be  done  for  the  publick  advantage  of  the  Church.  In  such 
particular  cases,  which  very  rarely  happen  (and  such  I  take  that  of  intro 
ducing  a  Liturgy  to  be,  to  prevent  the  nauseous  tautologies,  the  rashness 
and  confusion,  not  to  say  blasphemies,  that  cleave  to  extempore  prayers),  I 
grant  it  may  be  justly  presum'd  that  it  is  the  intention  of  Lawgivers  to 
dispense  with  their  Laws  :  and  then  in  the  like  circumstances  as  your 
Church  is  in.  the  care  of  it  naturally  returns  to  the  Bishops  and  Pastours, 
to  whom  Christ  committed  it.  But  unless  you  can  make  it  evident  that  all, 
or  even  any  of  your  transactions  in  the  late  Synod,  come  under  the  case  of 
Necessity,  the  Laws  will  have  their  due  force  against  them,  and  render  them 
of  no  validity.  Let  me  then,  I  beseech  you,  ask — Are  any  of  your  new 
Canons  necessary '?  Nay,  was  not  your  Church  in  a  much  more  peaceable 
state  before  the  enacting  of  them  than  since,  and  consequently  are  they  so 
much  as  expedient '?  Is  it  necessary  for  you,  by  your  sole  authority,  to  draw 
up  farther  catechetical  instructions  than  are  contained  in  the  Liturgy  ?  And 
have  not  the  youth  both  in  your  Church  and  ours  been  sufficiently  instructed  Questions, 
by  the  use  of  the  present  Catechism,  being  diligently  explained  by  those 
whose  duty  it  is  to  instruct  them  '?  And  will  you  affirm  there  is  any  manner 
of  occasion  for  a  new  Ordinal  '?  Please  to  answer  these  plain  questions,  and 
then  I  will  no  longer  oppose  but  vindicate  you. 

There  is  one  of  your  Canons  which  I  cannot  but  particularly  take  notice 
of,  as  it  concerns  you  rather  more  than  any  other  of  your  Colleagues,  and  that 
is  the  9th,  about  the  Exemption.  By  virtue  of  this  Canon  you  have,  during  panon  of 
the  vacancy  of  the  See  of  Edinb.,  exempted  your  Congregation  from  that  See.  Exemption. 
Now,  besides  that  the  exemption  of  a  parcel  of  a  Bislioprick,  made  by  the 
remaining  Bishops  alone,  without  staying  for  the  consent  of  the  future 
Bishop  and  his  Clergy,  and  also  that  of  the  State,  seems  a  manifest  injury 
to  that  See,  I  must  put  you  in  mind,  and  I  wish  you  had  before  considered 
it,  that  such  exemptions  arc  against  the  Laws  both  of  your  Church  and 
State;  since,  as  appears  from  Archbishop  Spotswood,  p.  514,  these  have 
taken  all  possible  care  to  remove  and  prevent  them  in  the  following  words  : 
— "Whereas  there  be  in  sundry  Dioceses  some  Churches  belonging  to  other 
Bishops,  that  care  be  taken  to  exchange  the  Churches  one  with  another,  that 
all  the  Dioceses  may  be  contiguous,  if  possibly  they  may  be  performed." 
Perhaps  you  will  in  defence  of  your  Canon  say  that  some  few  of  the  Bishops 
of  England  have  exempt  Chappels  in  or  near  London,  and  therefore  why 
may  not  you  '?  But  to  this  I  answer — That  the  English  Bishops  have  not 
this  privilege  merely  from  an  Episcopal  Canon,  but  from  the  consent  of  all 
parties  concern'd,  viz.,  that  of  the  Bishop  in  whose  Diocese  the  Chappel  is, 
and  that  of  the  Pope  also,  and  of  the  King;  for  you  can't  but  know  that 
these  Exemptions  were  first  made  in  Popish  times  ;  and  since  the  Ileforma- 
tion,  they  have  been  confirmed  by  Act  of  Parl.  in  Hen.  Sth's  time.  When 
you  can  shew  such  authority  for  your  Exemption,  nobody  Avill  dispute  that 
privilege,  thu  there  is  no  footstep  of  it  in  the  primitive  ages.  But  if  you 


208 


DISTEICT  OF  FIFE. 


M'Kcnzie : 
Falkener. 


Scottish 
Liturgy. 


Cotton  and 
Bowdler. 


can't,  will  not  those  you  call  Rebels  be  apt  to  say  that  you  exalt  yourselves 
above  Popes  and  Kings,  and  the  Pontifical  and  Eegal  authority  must  yield 
to  yours  ?  I  am  afraid,  notwithstanding  your  Canon,  Mr.  Mackenzie  will 
have  a  very  strong  plea  against  you,  and  I  can't  but  be  concern'd  to  find  you 
have  parted  with  him  upon  this  account.  This  your  separation  from  a  faith- 
full  Presbyter,  who  abides  by  the  Establish'd  Constitution  of  your  Church, 
seems  to  amount  to  a  publick  declaration  you  have  left  the  Communion  of 
the  Establish'd  Church;  and  then  yours  is  a  schismatical  assembly,  and  no 
one  who  has  a  regard  for  his  spiritual  interest  ought  to  join  in  it.  This  is 
the  learned  Mr.  Ealkencr's  judgement  in  his  1. ilia-tux  J-'.cclcxiaxtica,  p.  51, 
where  lie  says  that  one  of  the  conditions  requir'd  in  any  particular  fixt 
Assembly,  embracing  the  Christian  Faith  and  Worship  in  the  place  of  our 
residence,  to  make  it  our  duty,  upon  account  of  the  Christian  unity,  to  joyn 
therein,  is  this — that  the  Assembly  we  joyn  in  doth  not  maintain  an  unirar- 
r/niinli/i'  xr/ntr<ttion  from  the  Communion  of  the  Established  Church  ;  for  here 
to  joyn  in  Communion  is  to  joyn  in  separation,  and  is  like  Barnabas  and  the 
other  Jews  joining  with  S.  Peter,  who  all  walked  contrary  to  the  truth  of  the 
Gospel,  in  withdrawing  from  the  Communion  of  the  Gentiles  at  Antioch, 
and  the  Communicating  with  such  a  separating  Assembly  would  be  a  breach 
of  that  Apostolical  Command  of  avoiding  those  who  cause  divisions.  And 
we  may  observe  that  the  joining  in  mrd/cxs  separations,  being  a  sin  against 
the  commands  of  Christ,  which  require  Christian  Unity  and  Connection, 
cannot  be  warranted  l>y  any  authority  upon  cartJi." 

You  have  cited  several  passages  out  of  my  Letters,  wherein  I  have  given 
the  preference  to  the  Scottish  Liturgy;  but  'tis  obvious  to  observe  that  I 
don't  mean  it  is  better  than  ours  in  things  of  any  moment.  It  is  only  in 
circumstantials,  not  in  the  substance  or  essence  of  the  Ministration,  it  is  a 
little  fuller  expressed  in  some  particulars,  which  yet  are  sufficiently  provided 
for  in  ours.  But  at  the  same  time  I  allow  it  to  be  better  in  this  respect ;  yet 
I  assert  that  ours  is  better  with  respect  to  the  present  circumstances  of  the 
Church,  it  being  a  better  instrument  of  preserving  the  strict  union  of  both 
Churches,  and  also  of  maintaining  peace  and  unity  among  yourselves.  And 
this  I  have  not  only  asserted  but  proved  in  mine  of  (Mr.  9,  and  it  is  my 
opinion  my  arguments  cannot  be  answered :  this,  however,  I  am  sure  of, 
that  you  have  not  answered  them.  For  which  reason  I  cannot  but  complain 
of  yo\u-  partial  citations  out  of  that  Letter,  with  regard  to  the  Liturgies ; 
whereas,  if  you  had  fairly  quoted  all  that  relates  to  that  business,  every 
Reader,  I  am  persuaded,  must  be  convinced  of  this  truth,  that  it  would  be 
much  happier  for  both  Churches  if  no  other  Com.  Office  but  ours  were, 
during  our  present  situation,  used  in  them.  I  expect,  therefore,  from  your 
candor,  that  you  will  do  me  so  much  justice  as  to  send  Mr.  Lyon,  to  whom 
you  have  sent  the  Excerpts,  a  Copy  of  the  most  considerable  part  of  my 
Letter,  Dated  9  Octr.,  beginning  with  these  words — "  I  thought  once  here  to 
have  made  an  end,  but  since  I  know  you  expect  to  be  informed,"  &c.  And 
this  necessary  request  I  make  because  I  have  not  an  exact  Copy  of  that 
Letter,  and  that  Mr.  Lyon  may  communicate  the  whole  to  my  worthy 
friends,  Mr.  Cotton  and  Mr.  Bowdler,  to  whom  he  has  shewed  the  scrapes, 
in  order  to  prejudice  them  agl  me.  Let  this  be  honestly  done,  and  then  they 
will,  it  may  be,  see  things  in  another  light  than  you  endeavour  to  put  them 
in.  What  I  have  strongly  pressed  in  that  Letter  is,  that  there  might  be  an 
universal  uniformity  in  the  Publick  Worship.  And  do  not  you  desire  the 


ROBERT  KEITH.  209 

same  ?  Are  not  these,  good  Sir,  your  own  words  : — "  Is  there  any  person,  Defence  of 
either  within  or  without  this  Kingdom,  so  envious  as  to  bo  sorry  to  see  any  tho  English 
Litnrtjij  received  with  universal  approbation  ?  Ought  not  every  true  Chris-  Lltul'8y- 
tian,  instead  of  obstructing,  to  wish  for  such  an  happy  event  (i.e.,  for  a 
Nation  to  be  fully  united  in  one  mind  and  voice),  and  when  it  comes,  if  ever 
it  shall  come,  to  holdup  his  hands  and  say,  I'nt/xr/l  In'  iln>  Lnnl !  "  Now  it' it 
would  be  envious  in  any  person  to  be  sorry  to  see  any  Litan/i/  received  with 
universal  approbation,  pray  what  sort  of  people  must  they  be  who,  I  fear, 
would  be  right  sorry  to  see  the  English  so  received?  And  if  it  would  be 
happy  for  a  Nation  to  he  fully  united  in  one  mind  and  voice,  would  it  not  ho 
a  still  much  happier  event  if  both  Nations  were  so?  AYhv  then  do  some, 
who  I  hope  are  true  Christians,  use  tbeir  utmost  efforts  to  obstruct  it '?  Bat 
this  I  know  is  a  tender  point,  and  therefore  shall  say  no  more  about  it.  I 
shall  only  take  the  liberty  to  add  that,  notwithstanding  the  very  weak  objec 
tions  made  ag'  it,  our  Office  is  as  agreeable  to  our  B.  Saviour's  Institution, 
and  also  to  the  doctrine  and  practice  of  the  Primitive  Church  in  all  necessary 
points,  as  any  Office  whatever;  and  this  we  are,  God  be  thanked,  very  able 
to  demonstrate  against  all  gainsayers. 

But,  however,  to  put  an  end  to  this  part  of  the  dispute,  we  are  willing 
to  compromise  the  matter.  We  shall  not  insist  upon  the  sole  use  of  our 
Liturgy,  altho  we  think  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  it  from  its  having  the  ComPr°misc- 
first  and  sole  possession.  We  are  willing  to  lay  aside  our  fears  and  sus 
picions,  and  to  hope  it  is  your  settled  judgement  that  both  Offices  are  in 
sense  and  substance  the  same.  Now,  in  order  to  give  us  a  full  assurance  of 
this,  we  desire  that  the  Bishops  will  unanimously  make  a  Declaration  that 
they  approve  of  the  use  of  the  Church  of  England's  Office,  as  well  as  of  their 
own,  and  don't  refuse  to  Communicate  where  it  is  used  ;  and  to  prevent  and 
obviate  the  calumnies  of  the  malicious,  that  they  will  promise  sometimes 
(suppose  once  a  year)  to  officiate  by  it  ;  and  that  they  will  re-establish  the 
1st  Article  of  the  Concordatc,  wherein  the  English  Office  is  put  upon  an 
equal  foot  with  their  own  :  and  that  they  will  strictly  adhere  to  this  Article, 
not  deviating  in  the  least  from  the  Words  or  Kubricks  of  either  Liturgy,  or 
making  any  alteration  in  them,  either  by  mutilating,  adding,  or  transposing, 
otherwise  it  is  manifest  the  Article  of  the  Concordate  is  not  observed;  for  if 
the  Offices  are  any  way  altered,  'tis  plain  they  are  neither  the  Scottish  nor 
the  English,  but  other  Offices  of  men's  own  devising ;  and  if  once  a  change 
is  admitted,  it  is  hard  to  tell  where  it  will  end.  We  are  well  informed  what 
changes  are  made  in  both  Offices,  and  particularly  we  know  that  the  Office 
commonly  used  as  the  Scottish,  is  in  several  instances  different  from  the 
genuine  one  Published  in  K.  Ch.  Ist's  time.  And  besides,  it  is  notorious 
enough  that  some  interlard  it  with  Dr.  Rattray's  additions,  mentioned  in 
Bishop  Dunbar's  Letter.  Now,  we  desire  that  no  such  unauthorised  practice 
be  permitted  for  the  future,  since  nothing  but  schism  and  confusion  can  be 
the  issue  of  it.  And  if  you  will  condescend  to  put  the  matter  upon  this  foot, 
we  shall  then  be  satisfied  there  is  a  perfect  agreement  between  the  two  Scotch  Litrrgy 
Churches  in  this  matter,  for  that  you  will  thereby  give  full  evidence  there  is  illterlfmte(1- 
no  necessity  for  the  alterations  in  either  of  the  Liturgies  ;  and  you  may 
depend  upon  it  we  will  give  you  all  the  assistance  we  can  in  promoting  this 
settlement. 

Bishop  Alexander  is  displeased  with  me  in  supposing  there  was  a  design 
of  extirpating  our  Office  ;  but  certainly  to  take  away  its  establishment,  which 

VOL.   II.  2   1) 


210 


DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 


Extirpating 
the  English 
Office. 


Bishop  Rat- 
tray's  Canon. 


Bp.  Dunbar. 


was  the  Concordate,  looks  extremely  like  such  a  design.  For  suppose  the 
Engl.  Parl'  should  declare  the  Act  of  Uniformity  vacated,  would  not  every 
man  conclude  the  purpose  was  to  extirpate  the  Liturgy,  especially,  too,  if 
the  Par!'  should  at  the  same  time  strongly  recommend  another ;  for  this 
would  demonstrate  that  tho  the  former  might  he  tolerated  for  a  while,  yet 
the  rooting  it  out  by  degrees  was  intended,  in  order  to  the  establishment  of 
the  latter  Liturgy.  *  Unless,  therefore,  the  1st  Article  of  the  agreement  be 
restored,  we  must  believe  the  extirpation  of  it  was  in  view  ;  and  then  neither 
we  nor  your  own  Ivebells,  as  you  call  them,  will  be  able  to  forbear  guessing 
at  the  reasons  of  it,  and  laying  them  open  in  the  most  publick  manner, 
which  the  necessary  defence  of  the  Church  of  England  will  require  us. 

As  to  your  intention  of  introducing  St.  James's  Liturgy  into  the  Publick 
Worship,  our  belief  of  it,  I  assure  you,  did  not  proceed  from  any  injurious 
representation  some  people  gave  us,  as  Mr.  Alexander  supposes,  but  from 
what  seemed  to  us  the  most  obvious  and  natural  sense  of  Bishop  Dunbar's 
Letter  and  your  answer  to  it,  backed  with  your  proceedings  in  the  Synod, 
Avhcrein  you  exactly  folloAV  Mr.  Dunbar's  advice.  And  this  was  not  only 
my  opinion,  whom  you  may  perhaps  imagine  to  be  prejudiced,  but  also 
that  of  rny  Colleagues,  upon  their  careful  perusal  of  your  Minutes.  Mr. 
Dunbar  desires  you  to  establish  Bishop  Piattray's  Canons,  and  not  tit  ////s 
time  to  enjoin  the  Scottish  Liturgy,  but  only  to  recommend  it,  and  that  for  this 
reason — because  one  more  prinutire  ami  c.ccellenl,  irhu-li  co*t  J>r.  11.  much  labour, 
tiixl  irJiicli  lie  litm  left  in  a  rcri/ j'air  Jl/.S'.,  tnuij  one  d<n/  be  Published  ami  rece/red 
irith  itiiicertuil  «]>prob«tion.  You  have  exactly  followed  his  advice  as  far  as 
you  could  for  the  present ;  you  have  established  those  Canons  ;  you  have 
iiot  at  //(/'.<  time  enjoined,  but  only  strongly  recommended  the  Scottish 
Liturgy.  You  likewise  say  in  your  Letter  that  his  sentiments  arc  in  all 
respect*  just  in  thimjs  touched  upon  I/;/  him,  and  that  he  will  find  by  the  Minutes 
how  just  a  regard  you  have  for  them.  Now  we  know  that  a  fair  MS.  of  Dr. 
R.'s  had  been  sent  up  to  bo  Published  ;  and  not  imagining  there  was  any 
other  fair  MS.,  we,  as  any  man  would,  thought  we  had  good  reason  to  infer 
that  this,  when  Published,  was  to  be  made  use  of,  especially  since  the  only 
reason  (as  we  verily  believed  from  the  wording  of  the  Letters  and  your  pro 
ceedings)  why  the  Scottish  Liturgy  was  not  then  enjoined,  but  only  recom 
mended,  was  because  you  waited  for  S.  James's  Liturgy,  as  Mr.  Dunbar 
advised  you,  and  as  you  seemed  to  us  to  intend  by  your  saying  his  senti 
ments  in  things  touched  upon  are  in  all  respects  just.  You  say  in  your 
Declaration — "  That  you  have  taken  no  notice  of  that  expression  of  Bishop 
Dunbar's  neither  in  the  Canons  nor  your  Letter ;  so  far  otherwise,  that  by 
recommending  the  use  of  the  Scottish  Liturgy,  you  have  plainly  shewn  you 
intended  no  further  alterations."  To  this  might  very  well  be  answered  that 
you  have  not  taken  express  notice  in  your  Letter  of  any  of  the  particulars 
in  Mr.  Dunbar's,  but  have  commended  them  all  in  the  lump.  Is  it  not  then 
natural  to  suppose  you  intended  to  commend  the  particular  of  the  fair  MS. 
as  well  as  any  of  the  rest '?  And  the  recommending  the  use  of  your  Liturgy 
is  very  far  from  shewing  you  intended  no  further  alterations  :  it  rather  shews 
the  direct  contrary  ;  because,  as  any  one  might  reasonably  collect,  you 
recommended  it  only  for  the  present  till  the  other  should  be  Published,  in 
order  to  be  recommended  if  not  enjoined  by  you,  as  more  primitive  and 
excellent.  Now,  I  will  be  judged  by  any  one  whether  our  construction  of 
Bishop  Dunbar's  Letter,  &c.,  considering  all  circumstances,  is  not  very 


ROBERT  KEITH.  211 

natural.  But,  however,  since  Mr.  D unbar  himself,  whose  age  we  reverence, 
and  who  must  know  his  own  meaning  best,  solemnly  affirms  he  was  for  no 
changes  at  present  in  the  Publick  Worship ;  and  since  you  and  Mr.  Alex 
ander  declare  that  neither  yourselves,  nor  any  other  of  the  Bishops,  intended 
any  further  alterations,  we  hereby  assure  you  we  are  fully  satisfied  with 
your  Declaration,  and  arc  heartily  glad  you  have  no  such  intention ;  and 
tho,  as  you  may  perceive,  AVG  had  not  the  least  thought  of  injuring  you  by 
maliciously  putting  this  interpretation  upon  your  words  and  actions,  yet  we 
very  willingly  ask  your  pardon  for  it. 

There  is  yet  one  passage  in  Mr.  Dunbar's  last  Letter  to  you,  which  you 
may  easily  imagine  we  must  be  concerned  at — "If  you  have  not  seen  (says  Bishop  Rat 
he)  the  MS.  that  I  recommended,  I  now  tell  you  it  had  two  columns  on  each  tray's  practice, 
page.  In  the  1st  was  the  Scottish  Com.  Office;  in  the  other  were  such 
parcells  of  the  Liturgies  of  S.  James  and  S.  Clement  as  he  (Bishop  Rattray) 
thought  desirable  or,  it  may  be,  iiece-wiri/  to  be  brought  in  at  their  proper 
marked  places.  And  this,  I  think,  but  am  not  sure,  was  his  practice  when  he 
administered  the  H.  Eucharist  in  his  own  house."  I  am  sorry  to  find  this  was 
that  worthy  person's  practice  ;  but,  having  a  respect  for  his  memory,  I  shall 
make  no  reflections  upon  it,  and  shall  only  observe  that  his  example  and,  it 
may  be,  encouragement,  has  induced  others  to  do  the  same,  as  I  am  well 
assured  you  will  find  upon  a  strict  inquiry. 

Tho  you  intend  no  further  alterations  in  the  Communion  Office,  yet  p,. .,. 
your  Minutes  inform  us  that  you  intended  alterations  in  the  Catechism  and  Alterations, 
the  Ordinal.  Now  this  gives  some  ground  to  suspect  you  design  the  same 
in  other  Offices  ;  and  most  certainly  you  have  as  much  right  in  the  one 
case  as  in  the  other.  This,  methinks,  savours  too  much  of  an  innovating 
spirit ;  but  you  must  be  sensible  this  right  which  you  assume  will  always  be 
contested  with  you,  and,  I  may  venture  to  foretell,  will  never  be  able  to 
prevail  against  your  own  Church  Establishment,  by  the  Rules  of  which  you 
can  compile  no  new  Offices  by  your  own  authority.  As  to  the  Ordinal,  'tis 
plain  you  ought  not  to  set  the  English  aside,  because  it  appears  from  the 
custom  and  practice  of  your  Church,  which  you  can't  contradict,  that  it  is 
authorized  both  by  your  Church  and  State.  I  grant  your  own  Ordinal, 
having  the  same  pubhck  authority  to  warrant  it,  may  likewise  be  used  in 
the  Consecration  of  Bishops.  But  how  defective  it  is  with  regard  to  the 
Ordination  of  Priests  and  Deacons,  appears  from  the  following  words  in  Mr. 
Collier's  History,  vol.  ii.,  p.  708  :- — "  Wederburn  acquainted  the  Archbishops 
with  some  defects  in  the  Scottish  Ordinal,  as,  1st,  that  the  Order  of  Deacons 
was  made  no  more  than  a  Lay  Office;  and,  2dly,  in  the  admission  to  the  Defects  of 
Priesthood,  the  essential  words  for  conferring  Orders  were  omitted.  When  the  Ordmal- 
the  King  understood  their  Book  was  thus  remarkably  short,  he  commanded 
Laud  to  give  them  the  choice  of  this  alternative  :  either  to  admit  the  Eng. 
Book,  or  else  to  rectify  their  own  in  these  two  important  instances.  And  in 
the  King's  instructions,  the  Archbishops,  &c.,  are  required  that  in  their  Book 
of  Ordination,  in  giving  Orders  to  Presbyters,  they  should  keep  the  words  of 
the  English  Book  without  any  change — Receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  rfr."  Now 
it  does  not  appear  there  was  ever  any  such  alteration  made  as  the  King  en 
joined,  the  Episcopal  Government  being  soon  after  in  a  tumultous  manner 
overturned.  But  it  is  very  plain  there  was  a  necessity  for  this  change,  and 
therefore  no  question  but  the  Bishops  and  Pastors,  especially  when  enjoined 
to  do  so  by  the  King,  might  provide  for  the  supplying  of  such  material 


212  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

defects.  Hence,  when  Episcopacy  was  restored,  nil  parties  concerned  in 
giving  authority  to  a  Form  of  Ordination  concurred  in  allowing  the  use  of 
the  English,  hut  probably  not  so  as  to  exclude  your  own  Form  in  the  Con- 

Severe  lnts  .  .  . 

as  to  Scotch  secrating  of  Bishops,  its  sufficiency  for  that  purpose  being  agreed  to  by  all. 
Episcopal  Now,  since  you  can't  pretend  there  is  a  necessity  for  farther  changes,  it 
Ritual.  follows  that  upon  all  such  occasions  you  must  cither  use  the  Old  Ordinal 

without  any  new  additions,  or  else  the  English,  these  being  the  only 
Ofiices  owned  by  your  Church.  If,  therefore,  you  should  use  any  new  Office, 
you  act  contrary  to  the  Publick  Establishment,  and  whoever  is  Ordained 
thereby  cannot  be  a  Bishop  of  your  Established  Church  ;  neither  can  any  of 
those  who  either  Ordain  him  or  allow  of  his  Ordination.  For  by  this  un 
lawful  act  they  would  set  up  and  make  themselves  Bishops  of  a  new  Church, 
distinct  and  separate  from  the  Established,  and  from  the  Church  of  England, 
which  is  in  Communion  with  it.  I  beg,  therefore,  you  will  be  content  with 
your  present  Offices,  and  let  not  an  itch  of  novelty  hurry  you  on  to  under 
take  what  you  can  never  defend.  1  had  not  the  opportunity,  tho  1  saw  it  in 
the  Lawyers'  Library,  carefully  to  examine  your  Ordinal;  but  as  to  ours,  I 
believe  it  is  as  agreeable  to  the  monuments  of  the  remotest  antiquity,  as  you 
or  any  other  learned  person  can  draw  up. 

I  n  turn  you  thanks  for  informing  me  that  you  have  an  original  Act  of 
Ordination,  performed  NiTundimi  nun'im  it  rlnnii  Ecclcsid'  Scniicmin'.     But  you 
know,  according  to  the  Proverb,  "One  swallow  does  not  make  a  summer;'' 
and.  besides,  these  words  might  be  perfectly  true  tho  it  was  performed  by 
Bo  either          our  Ofiice,  which  your  Church  had  naturali/ed  and  made  her  own;   so  that 
English.  Mich  an  Act  seems  no  convincing  proof  that  the  person  was  not  Ordained  by 

our  Form.  And,  lastly,  if  this  was  the  Ordination  of  a  Presbyter,  it  is  too 
plain  the  validity  of  it  might  be  questioned,  thro'  the  insufficiency  of  the 
Ritual.  And.  indeed,  I  do  not  much  wonder  at  such  an  Act  in  IGtSO,  since 
your  Bishops  and  Clergy  had,  before  the  Revolution,  very  loose  notions 
concerning  Ordination,  and  admitted  Ministers,  merely  Presbyterians,  to 
officiate  as  Clergymen  without  an  Episcopal  Commission.  But  we  need 
make  no  more  words  about  this.  Keep  close  cither  to  the  Scot,  or  Engl. 
Ordinal  in  the  Consecration  of  Bishops,  and  to  the  Scot,  or  Engl.  Com. 
Office,  and  nobody  then  will  raise  any  objection. 

I  don't  understand  for  what  purpose  you  cite  a  passage  of  one  of  my 
Letters   to   Mr.   Gillan,   about   a    Countreyman   of  yours   (one   Clerk,  if  I 
remember  right),  who  fled  out  of  the  Kingdom  for  getting  a  woman  with 
Clerk's  child;  and  being  in  Deacon's  Orders,  was  afterwards  a  Curate  at  Jarrow,  in 

Fornication,  this  neighbourhood  ;  and  being  recommended  to  the  Bishop  of  Edinr  to  be 
made  a  Priest,  by  some  of  our  Communion  at  Newcastle,  who  knew  nothing 
of  his  crime,  was  Ordained  by  him,  and  now  acts  under  Mr.  Campbell  at 
London.  I  can  assure  you  I  had  no  baud  in  recommending  him  for  Orders, 
and  therefore  how  this  affects  me  I  can't  imagine.  If  somebody  has  en 
deavoured  to  blacken  me  upon  this  man's  account,  I  hope  you  will  let  me 
know,  and  give  me  an  opportunity  of  clearing  my  reputation  ;  for  he  is  one 
I  never  saw  in  all  my  life,  nor  heard  of  till  after  he  became  Mr.  Campbell's 
Presbyter. 

The  affair  of  Mr.  Fife  is  a  point  of  some  delicacy,  and  it  will  be  a  diffi 
cult  matter  to  speak  of  it  without  giving  offence ;  but  I  am  obliged  to  say 
something,  and  therefore  I  shall  touch  it  as  tenderly  as  the  nature  of  the 
thing  will  bear.  And  1.  You  cannot  but  be  apprized  that,  at  the  very  time 


EGBERT  KEITH.  213 

when  I  was  at  Edin1',  Mr.  Fife's  Censure  was  construed,  both  by  the  people 
of  Dundee  and  others,  to  be  a  designed  affront  put  upon  the  English  Office  ; 
and  you  may  please  to  remember,  that  when  I  asked  you  what  was  the 
ground  of  the  quarrel,  you  told  me  in  these  very  words,  "it  Avas  about  the  Flfe's  Case- 
Liturgy."  Now,  you  can't  imagine  but  such  a  seemingly,  at  least,  contume 
lious  usage  of  our  Church  is  somewhat  hard  of  digestion  ;  and  I  believe,  if  it 
were  your  own  case,  you  would  be  as  impatient  under  it  as  I  was.  2.  1 
grant  that  Mr.  Fife's  intrusion  (abstractly  considered,  without  those  allevi 
ating  circumstances  which  I  gave  you  an  account  of  in  my  Letter)  was  an 
act  highly  provoking  and  schismatical,  and  deserving  the  severest  censure. 
But  you  know  I  gave  you  in  my  Letter  good  reason  to  believe  there  were 
mistakes  and  misunderstandings  on  both  sides,  and  that  therefore  consider 
ing  the  bad  consequences  of  such  censure,  it  was  much  better  to  use  tender 
ness  than  the  utmost  rigour.  You  have  my  words  before  you,  and  therefore 
I  need  not  repeat  them.  This  I  am  sure  of,  that  if  you  had  transcribed  that 
part  of  my  Letter  as  you  should  have  done,  and  as  I  now  request  you  to  do, 
the  passages  you  have  extracted  would  not  bear  that  invidious  sense  which 
you  would  insinuate,  o.  If  Mr.  Fife's  Intrusion  was  irregular,  so  likewise 
was  your  Censure,  it  being  contrary  to  the  very  nature  and  end  of  Church 
Discipline,  which  is  for  edification  and  not  for  destruction  ;  and  also  contrary 
to  the  sentiments  and  practice  of  the  Primitive  Church  to  come  to  extremi 
ties,  where  a  multitude  is  concerned,  which  yourself  was  pleased  to  acknow 
ledge.  And,  therefore,  I  take  leave  to  answer  to  Bishop  Alexander's 
question — What  was  then  left  for  the  Bishops  to  do  other  than  what  they 
did  ? — that  the  severity  of  Discipline  in  such  a  case  was  not  to  be  exerted, 
lest  the  Church  should  be  involved  in  a  dangerous  Schism  ;  and  such  a 
multitude  of  offenders  had  better  been  tolerated  than  the  Church  be  divided. 
•1.  Before  Mr.  Fife's  Deposition,  the  Coiicordate,  upon  which  the  Establish 
ment  of  the  English  Office  stood,  was  vacated,  and  the  Scottish  Office  alone 
was  to  be  recommended  in  the  strongest  manner.  Now,  this  act  of  yours 
was  enough  to  make  any  body  conclude,  with  Mr.  Fife  and  his  people,  that 
you  had  no  very  kind  inclinations  towards  our  Ofiice  ;  and  the  Deposition, 
coming  upon  the  back  of  it,  might  reasonably  enough  induce  one  to  believe  His  Deposition 
it  one  of  the  xtrunt/  tintiiiicrx  of  recommending  the  other,  altho  you  may1  c°a ' 
perceive  it  had  a  quite  contrary  effect.  It  is  very  plain  by  declaring  it 
vacated  you  broke  the  Coiicordate,  which  was  the  Original  Contract  made 
by  yourselves,  and  the  very  condition  upon  which  the  obedience  of  the  Clergy 
and  people  was  due  to  you.  Now,  this  is  at  least  as  unjustifiable  a  step  as 
Mr.  Fife's  Intrusion  ;  and  when  you  had  thus  by  your  own  mouths  given 
them  a  discharge  from  farther  obeying  you,  the  consequence  must  be,  that 
any  censure  you  should  afterwards  pass,  could  not  affect  those  who  were  110 
longer  under  an  obligation  of  duty  to  you.  5.  In  this  Deposition  you  did 
not  observe  the  regular  course  of  proceeding.  The  Canon  of  your  Church, 
relating  to  this  affair,  is  this  (see  Sage's  "Vindication,"  p.  178) — "In  the 
Deposition  of  Ministers,  the  Bishop  associating  to  himself  the  Ministers  of 
the  Bounds,  Avherc  the  Delinquent  served,  he  is  then  to  make  trial  of  his 
fault,  and  upon  just  cause  found,  to  Deprive."  Now,  the  three  Bishops 
ordered  to  attend  the  trial,  were  not  Ministers  of  the  Bounds  ;  therefore,  the 
cause  was  brought,  cornm  IIOH  jiidice,  before  a  Court  which  had  no  lawful 
Jurisdiction,  and  consequently  the  sentence  passed  there  was  invalid.  G.  If 
before  the  Deposition  in  your  Synod,  illegally  and  uncanonically  assembled, 


214 


DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 


Pleading 
urgently  for 
his  reinstate 
ment. 


Bishop  Smith  you,  by  taking  upon  you  to  make  new  Canons  and  Decrees,  contrary  to  the 
siding  strong  Laws  of  your  Church,  shewed  yourselves  resolved  to  pay  no  farther  regard 
to  your  National  Constitutions,  and  consequently  ceased  to  be  any  longer 
rightfull  Bishops  of  the  National  Communion  ;  it  is  a  great  question  with 
me  whether  you  had  any  right  to  inflict  a  Censure  upon  Mr.  Fife,  who  was 
a  Presbyter  of  that  Communion,  and  whether  he  is  not  therefore  still  rectxs 
in  curia,  notwithstanding  that  censure. 

Now,  put  all  these  things  together,  and  then  consider  if  impartial  people 
would  not  judge  it  at  least  doubtful  whether  you  or  he  have  offended  most. 
It  is  certainly,  then,  the  best  way  for  all  sides  to  follow  the  Apostle's  advice 
— "Put  on  therefore,  bowels  of  mercy,  kindness,  humbleness  of  mind, 
meekness,  longsuffering,  forbearing  one  another  and  forgiving  one  another,  if 
any  man  have  a  quarrel  ag4  any  ;  even  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye." 
But  even  suppose  he  is  the  only  delinquent,  it  may,  I  hope  without  offence, 
be  said  others  have  been  so  in  a  like  kind.  Whatever  measure,  then,  lias 
been  meted  to  you,  let  the  same  be  measured  to  another.  What  has  been 
done  in  your  own  case,  even  so  do  to  your  brother  ;  if  you  have  received 
gentle  usage,  it  is  but  equitable  you  should  return  it.  This  seems  to  be 
good  and  Christian  counsel,  and  we  trust  you  will  follow  it,  which  we 
heartily  beseech  you  to  do,  as  one  necessary  means  tore-establish  the  peace 
of  the  Church.  And  we  hope  you  will  have  some  regard  to  our  intercession, 
which  we  arc  willing  to  believe  would  be  sufficient  for  the  saving  both  your 
honour  and  authority.  Nobody  doubts  but  the  Church  may  assert  or  relax 
its  Discipline  as  it  sees  cause.  Ecclesiastical  Law  is  not  a  Rule  of  indis 
pensable  obligation  to  the  Church,  but  such  as  it  may  and  ofttimcs  has 
receded  from,  on  great  reason  and  necessity.  What  Rules  the  Church 
makes,  it  may  abate  and  go  off  from  in  particular  cases,  as  need  shall 
require,  and  as  may  best  serve  those  ends  for  which  it  made  them.  To  heal 
the  division  made  by  the  Donatists,  Melchiad.es  and  the  Synod  of  Rome,  as 
S.  Austin  relates,  declared  their  readiness  to  send  communicatory  Letters 
even  to  those  who  were  Ordained  by  Majorinus  ;  and  decreed  that  whereso 
ever,  by  reason  of  the  breach,  there  were  two  Bishops,  he  should  be  Con 
firmed  who  was  first  Ordained,  which  S.  Austin  applauds  as  an  innocent  and 
perfect,  a  providential  and  pacifick,  judgement.  And  afterwards,  in  the 
Council  of  Carthage,  A.D.  419,  whereat  S.  Austin  himself  was  present, 
concerning  the  reception  of  the  Donatists  into  the  Church,  it  was  decreed 
that  the  Donatist  Clergy,  on  their  return  to  the  Church,  shall  be  received 
into  their  proper  Honours  or  Degrees  of  Orders ;  like  as  'tis  manifest  they 
have  been  received  in  Africk  in  the  times  foregoing.  These  are  noble  pre 
cedents  for  relaxing  and  making  abatements  in  cases  that  will  not  bear  the 
extremity  or  rigour  of  the  Law ;  and  as  it  becomes  all  pious,  meek,  and 
humble  Bishops  who  have  any  regard  for  the  Unity  of  the  Church  (the 
maintaining  of  which  is  the  end  of  all  Discipline),  to  lay  aside  all  their 
passions  and  resentment,  and  charitably  to  follow  them. 

I  now  come  to  propose  to  you  as  the  result  of  all  I  have  said,  the 
method  which  we  conceive  may  be  a  proper  ground  for  restoring  perfect 
tranquillity  and  an  universal  good  understanding,  and  leave  it  to  your  most 
serious  consideration. 

1.  That  you  suspend  sine  die  the  execution  of  all  new  Canons,  as  being 
made  contrary  to  your  National  Church  Constitution,  and  that  you  never 
attempt  the  like  for  the  future,  but  content  yourselves,  after  the  laudable 


Proposals. 


ROBERT  .KEITH.  215 

example  of  your  Predecessors,  with  executing  the  old  ones  already  canoni- 
cally  and  legally  enacted ;  and  that  in  all  your  Constitutions  for  the  time  to 
come,  you  consider  only  of  the  best  means  of  doing  so. 

2.  That  you  re-establish  the  first  Article  of  the  Concordate,  wherein  the 
two  Liturgies  are  put  upon  an  equal  foot ;   and  that  in  order  to  the  right 
and  true  observation  of  that  Article,  you  direct  all  the  Clergy  not  to  deviate 
in  the  least  title  from  the  Words  or  Eubricks  of  either  of  them,  neither 
adding  to,  mutilating,  or  transposing  any  part  thereof;  and  for  stopping  all 
misapprehensions,  that  you,  and  all  Presbyters  iising  the  Scottish  Liturgy, 
shall  at  least  once  a  year  Officiate  by  the  English,  to  demonstrate  your 
perfect  agreement  and  Communion  with  the  Church  of  England,  and  that 
you  will  declare  you  will  Communicate  indifferently  where  either  Liturgy  is 
used ;  and  lastly,  that  you  will  make  no  alteration  in  any  other  part  of  the 
Book  of  Com.  Prayer,  or  in  the  Forms  of  Ordination,  but  will,  in  the  Con 
secration  of  Bishops,  either  use  the  Scottish  or  English  Form,  and  in  the 
Ordination  of  Priests  and  Deacons  the  English  only. 

3.  To  shew  your  earnest  desire  of  perfectly  establishing  the  peace  and 
unity  of  the  Church,  that  you  will  please  to  declare,  that  either  out  of  your 
own  free  grace  and  favour,  or  upon  our  request  and  mediation,  which  you 
please,  you  are  willing  to  relax  the  rigour  of  Discipline,  and  to  receive 
any  Clergyman,  in  his  proper  character  and  station,  and  his  people  to  Com 
munion,  who,  having  been  guilty  of  no  other  crime  but  simply  separating 
from  you,  or  who  being,  under  censure  for  such  separation  only,  shall  return 
to  your  Communion. 

And  now,  dear  Sir,  I  have  laid  open  to  you  my  whole  mind  about  the 
momentuous  affair,  and  hope  Avhat  I  have  said  and  offered  will  not  be  alto 
gether  unregarded.  You  may  depend  upon  it  we  have  no  other  point  in 
view  but  restoring  peace  upon  the  surest  and  most  lasting  foundation ;  and 
if  we  could  once  see  any  probability  of  that,  it  would  be  matter  of  great  joy 
to  us.  I  thank  you  for  your  kind  admonitions,  to  which  it  will  be  your  own 
faults  if  a  just  respect  is  not  paid.  Do  but  your  own  duty,  and  then  it  will 
be  very  true  that  wo  neither  have  just  call  nor  title  to  mix  in  your  Church 
affairs.  We  have  not  been  yet  called  upon  nor  sollicitcd  by  any  body  to  do 
what  you  speak  of,  whatever  you  may  suspect ;  and  1  hope  we  never  shall. 
For,  besides  that  you  may  easily  suppose  nobody  would  be  very  fond  of 
being  engaged  in  such  troublesome  affairs,  you  may  be  assured  it  would  be 
the  highest  satisfaction  imaginable  to  see  every  difference  composed,  and  all 
feuds  and  animosities  extinguished;  and  I -wish  what  is  here  said  may  con 
tribute  in  some  measure  towards  so  desirable  an  end.  And  thu  it  must  be 
confessed  you  have  not  given  us  any  great  encouragement  to  make  any 
application  to  you,  yet  to  show  you  how  desirous  we  are  of  corresponding 
with  you  in  an  amiable  and  brotherly  way,  I  give  you  my  word  that  what  is 
here  said,  shall  be  communicated  to  no  person  whatever 'in  Scotland  besides 
yourself,  unless  it  appears  there  is  no  preserving  your  friendship  upon  just 
and  reasonable  terms,  which  I  shall  be  infinitely  concerned  at ;  and  even  if 
that  unhappy  case  should  fall  out  (which  God  forbid),  I  shall  give  you  notice 
of  my  intentions  to  Publish  this  as  my  vindication.  In  the  meantime,  for 
peace  sake,  I  am  very  willing  to  bear  with  patience  those  aspersions  which 
your  spreading  of  these  Papers,  as  I  have  cause  to  suspect,  may  occasion 
some  to  load  me  with.  However,  you  must  give  me  leave  to  send  a  Copy 
of  this  to  Mr.  Cotton  and  Mr.  Bowdler,  to  whom  Mr.  Lyon  has  shewn  the 


216  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Excerpts  ;  for  I  must  own  I  can't  endure  my  reputation  should  suffer  in  the 
opinion  of  persons  whose  friendship  I  have  so  much  reason  to  value.  And 
thus,  dear  Sir,  being  well  nigh  tired,  I  conclude  myself, 

Your  very  affect.  Brother  and  faithful  Monitor  in  Christ, 

G.  SMITH. 


Pi.  Pi.  and  Dear  Brother,  —  I  have  perused  the  ahove  Letter  to  Bishop 
Keith,  and  the,  there  may  he  some  particulars  in  it  wherein  perhaps  I  might 
have  chose  to  express  myself  differently  ;  yet  I  do  very  readily  and  heartily 
assent  to  the  three  propositions  at  the  close  of  it,  which  I  could  wish  (for 
the  sake  of  all  parties  any  way  concerned  in  these  unhappy  affairs)  might  he 
complied  with,  as  the  proper  and  solid  basis  on  which  to  repair  the  breaches 
already  made.  For  thus,  in  my  humble  opinion,  might  jealousies  be  extin 
guished,  all  unreasonable  clamour  stopped,  and  the  due  exercise  of  authority 
supported  and  preserved,  which  otherwise  must  be  for  ever  crushed  between 
the  two  extremes  of  haughtiness  and  contempt.  And  it  is  also  my  earnest 
Prayer  to  God,  the  Author  of  Peace  and  Concord,  that  Peace  may  speedily 
be  restored  to  His  Church,  that  we  may  ever  be  inseparably  united  with  our 
Brethren  of  Scotland  in  the  bonds  of  Love  and  Charity,  and  that  we  may 
always  live  and  correspond  with  them  as  Brethren  and  Colleagues  indeed. 

That  God  would  vouchsafe  His  blessing  to  these  and  all  other  laudable 
endeavours  for  the  peace  and  edification  of  His  Church,  is,  dearest  Brother, 
the  most  cordial  Prayer  of 

Your  most  affect,  humble  Servant, 

IiOJJT.   GORPOUX. 


Lftti'r  fi'nm  Jlixluiji  J'\f<tiniitt)i  <>J  F.iiijhtinl  In  ll/x/io 

II.  Eevd.  Sir,  —  I  have  carefully  read  and  considered  all  the  Papers 
you  sent  me  relating  to  the  unhappy  differences  in  Scotland,  and  own  it 
gives  me  the  greatest  concern  to  find  that  our  Brethren  there  have  made 
many  deviations  from  their  legal  Constitution.  I  hope  by  this  time  they 
may'he  sensible  of  the  mischiefs  that  must  necessarily  attend  it,  and  flatter 
myself  that  the  brotherly  advice  you  send  our  good  Brother,  Mr.  Keith,  may 
have  some  weight  with  him  and  his  Colleagues,  in  order  to  put  a  stop  to 
this  impending  evil.  I  would  hope  what  you  propose  might  effectually  do 
it;  and  as  for  my  own  part  (and  in  this  I  know  you  will  agree  wl  me),  I 
should  be  content  with  whatever  themselves  would  do,  in  the  healing  way, 
to  preserve  that  harmony  which  should  subsist  among  themselves,  and  with 
us  their  Sister  Church.  "  This  is  all  we  have  in  view  ;  and  that  Almighty 
God  would  inspire  all  Governours  with  the  Spirit  of  Meekness  and  Charity, 
and  their  subjects  with  Duty  and  Obedience,  is  the  earnest  Prayer  of, 

Dear  Sir,  your  ever,  £c., 

Tnio.  MAWMAX. 

Stockton,  June  10,  1744. 

Follow  in  Bishop  Smith's  hand  to  Bishop  Keith  :—  You  will  please  to 
send  these  Papers  separately  to  your  Colleagues,  with  my  respects  and 
service,  and  communicate  their  sentiments  as  well  as  your  own  as  soon  as 
conveniently  vou  can. 


EGBERT  KEITH.  217 

Bishop  Keith  to  his  Colleagues. 

E.  E.  and  D.  Brn,— By  Bishop  Smith  of  England  his  Letter  to  mo  of 
ye  4th  inst.,  yen  would  see  that  he  had  taken  it  in  his  head  to  tender  some 
proposals  to  us.  I  once  thought  to  have  desired  him  to  send  us  none  of  his 
proposals  ;  however,  I  forbare,  as  suspecting  that  nothing  would  have  force 
to  divert  him  from  his  favourite  purpose.  The  proposals  arc  now  come  to 
my  hand,  contain'd  in  the  hody  of  a  very  prolix  and  verbose  Letter,  and  w* 
a  request  likewise  that  I  may  transmit  ye  same  to  you,  together  with  two 
other  Letters  address'd  to  him  from  two  of  his  Colleagues  in  EngL,  one  of 
them  a  native  of  this  Kingdom,  and  both  of  them  it  appears  men  of  a  moro 
moderate  temper  than  himself.  This  Bishop,  you'll  perceive,  expects  to 
have  returns  from  us  ;  but,  for  myself,  if  I  continue  of  the  mind  I  am  now 
in,  truly  he  shall  receive  none  from  me  ;  for  I  neither  think  we  have  given 
him  any  ground  to  make  such  proposals  to  us,  nor  do  I  conceive  how  I  could 
give  a  return  to  his  Letters  without  employing  some  observations  and 
expressions  which,  among  men  of  our  Order,  decency  may  rather  require  to 
be  let  alone.  He  has  talked  of  late  in  such  a  magisterial  strain — "  You 
ought,"  "  you  should,"  "  we  must,"  &c. — and  with  such  an  air  of  superiority, 
as  if  all  we  in  Scotland  were  his  petty  Suffragans,  or  that  the  talents  of  his 
mind  were  as  far  above  ours  as  is  the  size  of  his  estate.  He  deals  so  much 
in  the  art  of  quibbling,  that  any  reply  would  not  only  be  tedious  but  likewise 
furnish  him  with  a  new  subject  for  filling  up  some  more  sheets  of  paper,  of 
which  on  his  part  there  would  be  no  end.  He  makes  and  unmakes  us 
Bishops  ;  he  directs,  confirms,  and  annulls  our  sentences  at  his  pleasure. 
The  peal  of  Constitution  which  he  rings  continually  in  our  ears,  can  be  only 
intended  to  teaze  us  with  the  sound  of  saying  something  and  yet  saying 
nothing.  He  prides  himself  in  being  always  on  the  healing  side,  and  offers 
us  his  service  for  that  good  purpose.  But  we  may  justly  say  to  him  this 
Proverb — "  Physician,  heal  thyself,"  for  we  are  not  ignorant  of  the  sores  in 
his  own  country.  He  brags  as  it  were  of  his  great  influence  to  create  peace 
to  us.  God  be  thanked,  we  are  in  profound  peace  thro'  all  ye  nation,  a  few 
seditious  persons  in  Edr  cxcepted,  and  who  arc  only  supported  and  whetted 
on  by  this  intermeddling  stranger.  I  now  see  and  acknowledge  my  error  in 
corresponding  with  this  person  contrary  to  ye  advice  of  our  deceased  dear 
Brother,  the  most  excellent  Dr.  Eattray,  with  whom  I  never  could  prevail  to 
exchange  one  Letter  wl  Bishop  Smith",  so  far  as  I  remember.  He  always 
said  he  suspected  him  to  be  a  dangerous,  and  I  now  add  a  fashious,  man. 
Therefore,  as  I  now  at  last  begin  to  know  the  man  and  his  communica 
tion,  I  judge  it  adviscable  for  me  to  let  him  talk  and  abound  in  his  own 
sense  ;  altho  what  I  here  say  is  by  no  means  intended  as  a  Rule  to  you,  my 
Brethren,  how  to  comport  yourselves  in  ye  present  matter ;  but  each  of  you 
may  follow  your  own  inclination  notwithstanding.  And  whatever  you  think 
fit  to  send  me  in  answer  to  these  Letters,  which  you  herewith  receive,  I  shall 
carefully  send  forward  to  this  Brother.  Meantime,  I  wish  ye  Divine  conduct 
may  ever  be  with  us  all ;  and  I  am,  with  great  respect,  Et  Eevd., 
Your  most  affect.  Brother  and  humble  Servant, 

EOBT.  KEITH. 
Edinr,  July  12,  1744. 

I   may  perhaps   afterwards  give  you   my  opinion  concerning  Bishop 

VOL.  II.  2  E 


218  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Smith's  asking  our  pardon,  and  his  passing  from  his  former  peremptory 
demand  of  our  using  ye  English  Liturgy  only  in  Scotland. 

Bishop  Campbell's  setting  up  and  heading  a  Communion  opposite  to  ye 
other  Bishops  in  England,  is  a  phrase  of  Bishop  Smith's  in  his  Letters  to 
Bishop  Gillan,  now  in  my  custody. 

Cojii/  of  Letter  from  JiisJiop  Smith  to  HisJinji  Keith. 

E.  E.  Sir, — I  acknowledge  you  have  given  strong  evidence  against  Mr. 
H.,  which,  both  upon  account  of  his  person  and  character,  I  am  sorry  to  see. 
But  suppose  him  as  bad  as  your  Letter  represents  him,  it  is  nothing  to  the 
merits  of  the  cause,  which  (whatever  be  Mr.  H.'s  case)  still  continue  the 
very  same,  and  must  do  so  ;  unless,  as  you  arc  bound  in  duty,  you  will 
please  to  subject  yourselves  to  the  Laws  and  Constitution  of  your  Church, 
and  stand  by  the  agreement  so  solemnly  made  by  you.  You  condemn  Mr. 
II.  for  breaking  through  his  solemn  engagement ;  and  whether  violating  the 
Concordate  (Subscribed  and  Publish'd  by  you),  by  declaring  it  vacated,  be 
not  in  like  manner  to  be  condemu'd,  I  leave  you  and  the  impartial  to  judge. 

At  the  bottom  of  p.  4G7  of  your  excellent  History,  there  is  this  Note — 
"  "We  see  men  in  power,  be  they  of  whatever  denomination,  are  still  of  one 
mind,  viz.,  to  carry  every  thing  with  a  high  hand  :"  Avhich  observation  your 
late  proceedings  have  too  much  verified.  But  I  hope  you  will  at  length 
begin  to  think  more  justly  and  pacifically,  otherwise  the  necessary  conse 
quence  will  be  a  formal  separation  from  you,  as  from  Archbishops  to  your 
National  Church  and  its  Communion,  and  as  from  persons  whom  neither 
the  Laws  Ecclesiastical  and  Civil,  nor  your  own  personal  engagements,  can 
lay  hold  of  and  keep  within  due  bounds.  I  hope  that  sad  event  will  never 
happen ;  but  if  through  your  default  it  should,  I  don't  at  all  question  but  I 
shall  be  able  fully  to  vindicate  myself  as  to  the  share  I  may  have  in  it,  and 
so  demonstrate  to  all  the  world  Avho  are  the  truly  seditious  and  extravagant 
persons,  the  mutineers  against  Laws,  and  consequently  wanderers  out  of 
the  way  of  peace  and  order. 

By  your  manner  of  writing,  I  begin  to  fear  you  are  resolved  entirely  to 
reject  the  advice  my  Colleagues  and  I  sent  you  in  our  late  Letters,  which  I 
am  sorry  for  ;  but  if  you  really  design  so  to  do,  please  to  take  notice  we  have 
done  our  duty  in  endeavouring  to  settle  peace  upon  the  only  firm  and  lasting 
bottom,  and  we  shall  not  be  answerable  either  to  God  or  man  for  any  mis 
chief  that  may  follow  upon  your  too  stiff  adhering  to  your  present  notions 
arid  practices. 

You  say  very  well,  ''Facts  are  sturdy  things,  and  despise  the  most 
subtil  arts  of  implication."  Now,  that  such  and  such  Laws  and  Canons, 
which  limit  your  authority,  were  enacted  and  stand  yet  in  full  force,  are 
sturdy,  plain,  and  glaring  facts,  which  your  strongest  assaults  will  never  be 
able  to  overthrow. 

That  you  may  no  longer  wonder  how  it  comes  to  passe  that  Mr.  Robert 
son's  queries  and  my  words  hit  so  exactly,  please  to  be  informed  that  I  had 
a  Copy  of  those  queries  long  before  the  writing  of  my  Lettre  of  June  26 ; 
and  if  I  borrowed  from  them  what  I  took  to  be  very  much  for  my  purpose,  I 
hope  there  was  no  harm  in  it. 

You  are  displeased  with  me  for  saying  the  Minutes  of  your  suppos'd 
Synod  in  1738,  are  as  useless  Paper.  Now,  I  must  confesse  I  still  think 


ROBERT  KEITH.  219 

them  so ;  because  that  was  not  a  lawful!  Synod,  but  only  a  Conventicle,  as 
the  Title  of  the  12th  Canon  of  the  Church  of  England  calls  such  Meetings. 
And  the  Canon  itself  censures  the  maintainers  of  Constitutions  made  in  such 
Conventicles  in  the  following  words  : — "  Whosoever  shall  hereafter  affirm 
that  it  is  lawfull  for  finy  *nrt  of  Ministers  and  Lay  persons,  or  either  of  them, 
to  join  together  and  make  Rules,  Orders,  or  Constitutions,  in  causes  Ecclesi- 
asticall,  without  the  Kimjs  (iiithnritij,  and  shall  submit  themselves  to  be  rul'd 
and  govern'd  by  them,  let  them  be  Excommunicated,  ipw  fncto"  To  this 
the  Laws  and  Canons  of  your  own  Church,  as  I  have  shewn  in  my  last,  are 
very  agreeable.  Your  Minutes,  therefore,  and  all  that  pay  any  regard  to 
them,  are  clearly  condemned  by  both  Churches  ;  and  nobody  that  thinks 
justly  will  be  able  to  discern  what  such  inauthoritative  things  are  good  for. 
For  my  part,  to  speak  my  mind  freely  to  you,  I  can't  but  look  upon  those 
who  make  and  defend  and  submit  to  such  unlawful!  Constitutions,  to  be 
what  the  Church  of  Engl.  in  her  9th  Canon  calls  a  new  brotherhood,  and  in 
her  10th  Canon,  nnoiher  Church  not  extnhlinli'd  l»j  Laic:  and  you  know  what 
censure  is  past  upon  such  authors  of  Schism  and  maintainers  of  Schismaticks 
and  Conventicles.  Consider  things  impartially,  and  I  trust  you  will  not  go 
on  to  act  as  you  do.  For,  depend  upon  it,  if  ever  the  matter  comes  to  be 
publickly  canvass'd  and  clearly  understood,  your  rash  and  lawless  proceed 
ings  will  not  bear  the  test,  and  will  inevitably  meet  with  the  just  contempt 
they  deserve,  from  all  who  have  any  regard  for  the  Laws  and  Constitutions 
of  their  Ch.  and  Coimtrey,  which  you  have  attempted  and  do  still  attempt 
to  set  aside  and  subvert.  It  is  an  infinite  trouble  to  me  to  speak  in  this 
manner,  but  the  cause  of  truth  requires  it ;  and  in  such  a  case  as  this,  either 
silence  or  mincing  the  matter  would  be  altogether  unjustifiable. 

So  again  recommending  to  the  serious  perusal  of  you  and  your  Col 
leagues  the  Letters  and  proposal  we  have  sent  you,  and  praying  God  to 
incline  the  hearts  of  all  persons  concern'd  to  embrace  such  measures  as  may 
produce  a  durable  settlement,  such  a  one  as  is  agreeable  to  the  Constitu 
tion  of  yours,  and  the  principles  and  doctrines  of  both  Churches, 

I  am,  R.  R.  Sir, 
Your  affectionate  brother  and  humble  Servt., 

Aug.  21,  1744.  G.  SMITH. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  these  words  in  your  Letter — "  I  saw  it  observ'd 
in  a  publick  Paper  that  inclination  has  a  great  power  over  judgement ;  and 
this  observation  came  from  England?"  I  don't  understand,  and  therefore 
can  say  nothing  to  them. 

I  hope  Mr.  Lyon  got  safe  to  his  journey's  end,  and  you  will  please  to 
present  my  service  to  him. 

[To  this  Letter  Mr.  Keith  gave  no  return.] 

JHxhop  Smith  to  Bishop  Keith. 

R.  R.  Sir, — By  your  Letter,  Dated  July  14,  you  told  me  that  you  had 
dispatch'd  Copy  of  our  Letters  to  your  Brethren  the  Bishops,  and  no  doubt 
they  all  of  them  receiv'd  such  Copy  soon  after.  I  have  now  by  me  an 
authentick  Account  that  the  Clergy  in  Buchan  were  by  their  Bishop  ap 
pointed  to  meet  at  Peterhead,  the  15  of  August.  He  laid  before  them  a 
Copy  of  my  Letter  to  Mr.  Mackenzie,  with  your  Answer,  as  also  some 


220  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Exceptions  from  my  former  Letters  to  Bishop  Gillan,  &c.,  whereby  you 
would  insinuate  that  I  now  contradict  my  former  sentiments.  But  the 
Bishop,  tho  it  is  plain  he  had  a  Copy  of  my  last  long  Letter,  wherein  I  have 
clearly  vindicated  myself  (without  any  possibility  of  a  reply)  from  your  in 
tended  reproaches,  did  not  lay  that  before  them,  lest  they  should  plainly 
discern  the  impertinence  as  well  as  malice  of  the  Excerptor.  I  make  not 
the  least  doubt  but  the  rest  of  the  Bishops  combine  in  the  same  unfair  and 
ungenerous  method  of  proceeding.  I  therefore  think  myself  bound,  in  my 
own  defence,  to  Publish  my  Letter,  and  those  of  my  Colleagues  auncxt  to  it, 
whereby  it  will  appear  to  all  persons  conccrn'd  that  we  are  not  those  Schis- 
matical^  mtermedlers  in  other  men's  affairs  as  you  Avould  pretend,  but  are 
only  doing  that  busiucsse  which  properly  belongs  to  us,  viz.,  protecting  those 
of  our  Communion  from  tyranny  and  oppression,  and  hindering  as  much  as 
we  can  all  the  pious  and  faithfull  Members  of  your  Church  from  following 
you  into  a  Schism ;  you,  who  have  set  up  another  new  Church  quite 
opposite  to  Uiat  which  is  by  Law  established  in  Scotland.  However,  I  shall 
not  take  this  step  till  after  Michaelmas  ;  nor  then  neither  if  you  can  clear 
yourself  and  your  Colleagues  from  this  dishonourable  way  of  acting.  But 
if  you  cannot,  you  must  not  blame  me  if  ane  exact  Account  of  this  whole 
affair  be  laid  before  the  Publick. 

I  have  been  inquiring  into  the  story  you  informed  me  of  concerning  Mr. 
Harper,  and  have  great  reason  to  believe  there  is  more  malice  than  truth 
in  it. 

I  take  leave  to  end  this   with  the  words  of  Gregory  the  Great Si 

Canoncs  >n»i  ciKlvililix,  fi  innjoniiii  n<///.s  ntntnta  conrcllcre,  non  coi/nosco  qui 
estis.  I  am,  R.  E.  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Brother, 

Sept.  10,  17-1-1.  G.  SMITH. 

Bishop  Keith  to  BisJtop  Smith. 

Sir, — I  have  your  most  rude  Letter  of  the  10th  current,  but  I  know  my 
own  character  better,  both  as  a  gentleman  and  a  Bishop,  than  to  repay  it 
and  your  former  of  a  like  nature  in  their  kind.  However,  I  must  advertise 
you  to  address  no  more  Letters  to  me,  for  I  do  assure  you  I  will  not  relieve 
them  from  the  Post  Ofiicc. 

As  I  told  you  in  my  Letter  of  the  1-lth  July,  I  did  dispatch  Copy  of 
your  long  Letter,  together  with  those  of  your  two"  Colleagues  (men  I  think 
of  better  temper  than  yourself),  to  my  Colleague  who  resides  nearest  to  me, 
and  by  him  to  be  transmitted  to  the  next  Bishop,  and  so  forward ;  but  I 
have  never  had  a  line  from  any  of  my  R.  R.  B"1  as  yet  on  that  subject,  and 
even  what  you  tell  me  of  the  loth  August  is  quite  new  to  me,  tho  it  be  not 
plain  enough  that  Bishop  Dunbar  was  then  in  possession  of  your  long  Letter  : 
he  might  indeed,  but  'tis  equally  probable  he  might  not. 

Everybody  is  not  of  your  mind  ;  for  very  good  judges  here,  and  of  very 
good  rank,  do  but  laugh  at  your  vindication  of  the  Excerptions  :  they  say 
you  outstrip  the  best  Jesuit  of  them  all.  The  Bishops  here  are  incapable  of 
any  dishonourable  way  of  acting :  they  leave  that  to  others  that  chuse  to  do 
so  ;  therefore  they  are  quite  easy  whether  you  Publish  any  thing  or  not 
Publish.  Nor  do  they  doubt  of  their  Clergy  and  People  standing  by  them 
against  the  iiicroachments  of  every  busy,  officious  intermeddler,  a  few  turbu- 


ROBERT  KEITH.  221 

lent  persons  with  sinister  views  exceptcd ;  and  they  as  firmly  believe  and 
hope  that  the  worthy  Members  of  the  Ch.  of  England  do  not,  will  not, 
approve  of  your  unaccountable  groundless  late  proceedings.  If  you  set 
about  the  Publication  of  an  "exact  Account  of  this  whole  affair,"  doubtless 
you  should  take  in  our  whole  Correspondence  since  the  9th  of  October  last ; 
but  if  not,  I  will  take  care  to  give  it  a  Supplement,  without  "addition,* 
mutilation,  or  transposition"  of  one  single  a,  b.  c,  down  to  this  present  Date, 
which  shall  shut  up  the  checqucr  twixt  you  and  me. 

If  there  be  more  malice  than  truth  in  that  scandalous  affair  of  Mr. 
Harper,  he,  you,  or  others  of  his  friends  will  have  the  easyer  plea  against  me, 
and  any  of  you  may  try  your  skill  when  you  think  fit.  Might  I  suggest  to 
you  to  ask  your  Correspondent,  if  you  please,  how  many  years  ago  he 
chanc'd  to  hear  of  that  crime,  and  what  might  be  the  ground  of  the  malice 
at  that  time  ?  I  dare  engage  'tis  a  dozen  of  years  ago.  Or  whether  Mr.  H. 
Avould  readily  part  with  his  money,  in  order  to  cvite  a  malicious  idle  story '? 
And  that  he  has  parted  with  it  shall  be  made  out.  Facts  will  always  remain 
to  be  sturdy  things,  unpliable  to  the  wills  or  interests  of  one  party  more  than 
another.  I  am,  Sir,  Your  humble  Servant, 

Edinb.,  Septr.  l.j,  17-1-1.  R.  KEITH. 

When  the  Bishops  give  me  a  return  to  your  Letter,  I  shall  direct  it 
for  you.  Mr.  Lyon  can  furnish  a  Copy  of  your  Letter  of  the  9th  Octr.  if  you 
still  want  it. 

[*  But  tliis  needs  not  hinder  other  things,  if  convenient,  to  be  added.] 

I.   Copy  of  Letter  from  Bishop  Smith  to  Mr.  Darid  Fife,  September  13,  1714. 

R.  Sir, — When  the  Messenger  came  which  you  and  the  other  worthy 
Gentlemen  of  your  Congregation  sent  to  my  House,  I  was  just  taking  horse 
for  Newcastle,  which  occasioned  my  writing  so  short  a  Letter.  I  had  not 
then  time  so  much  as  to  read  over  your  Letters,  so  I  hope  you  will  be  so 
good  as  pardon  the  hasty  scribble  I  returned  you  ;  and  believe  that  I  was 
very  much  concerned  I  should  seem  so  unmannerly  where  I  cannot  but 
acknowledge  I  owe  so  much  respect. 

It  must  needs  make  every  good  man's  heart  bleed  to  see  disturbances 
raised  by.  the  indescrction  of  those  whose  chief  business  it  should  be  to 
compose  them  ;  but  so  it  happens  that  your  Bishops  have  gone  into  measures 
which  both  necessarily  occasion  divisions  in  your  Church,  and  have  a  natural 
tendency  at  least  to  dissolve  the  union  between  that  and  ours.  They  have 
made  Canons  contrary  to  your  Ecclesiastical  Laws  and  Constitution.  They 
have  vacated  the  Concordate,  by  which  alone  themselves  have  a  right  to  be 
acknowledged  lawfull  Bishops.  They  have  shewn  their  inclination  for 
novelty  by  declaring  they  design  to  compose  a  new  Ordinal  and  make  addi 
tions  to  the  Catechism  ;  and  they  have  manifested  their  spleen  against  our 
Communion  Office,  by  annulling  that  upon  which  its  establishment  is 
founded.  What  farther  lengths  they  may  goe,  themselves  best  know,  but 
there  is  no  great  reason  to  rely  much  upon  their  promises  and  declarations, 
since  so  soon  as  they  thought  they  had  it  in  their  power,  they  broke  thro' 
those  engagements  which  themselves  had  solemnly  agreed  and  Subscribed  to. 

Upon  the  perusal  of  your  Papers,  I  think  it  plainly  appears  you  have 
had.  a  very  regular  Call  to  officiate  where  you  do,  and  that  the  Bishop 


222  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

therefore  ought  to  have  admitted  you,  unless  he  could  have  shown  you  sonic 
just  cause  to  the  contrary.  But  I  have  very  good  reason  to  believe  he  could 
not,  because  Mr.  Keith  himself  own'd  to  me  in  conversation  in  Edinr,  you 
were  unexceptionable  in  your  life  and  conversation  ;  and  it  appears  from  Mr. 
Eaitt's  Letter,  which  I  saw,  that  all  that  can  be  pretended  against  you  is, 
you  came  in  against  his  will,  who,  to  exclude  the  use  of  our  Liturgy,  had 
projected  an  union  between  the  two  Congregations  at  Dundee  ;  which,  'tis 
said,  the  heads  of  their  Congregations  at  first  consented  to,  but  Avhen  they 
found  out  the  drift  of  the  project,  soon  after  set  themselves  against  it.  And 
for  my  part,  if  that  were  the  case,  I  cannot  but  commend  them  for  not 
suffering  themselves  to  be  imposed  upon  by  a  piece  of  chicane,  contrived  to 
set  aside  that  excellent  form  of  Worship,  in  the  use  of  which  they  had  so 
long  received  much  spiritual  benefit.  But  it  seems  the  other  Office  was  to 
be  recommended  in  the  strongest  manner,  and  therefore  it  was  fit  the  most 
violent  methods  should  be  employed  to  establish  it. 

Your  case  appeared  so  hard,  even  to  Mr.  Keith  himself,  that  he  declared 
to  me  he  commiserated  it,  and  said  the  people  could  not  now  in  honour 
desert  you.  And,  moreover,  if  he  had  been  at  Dundee  with  his  Colleagues, 
he  would  have  been  against  the  Deposition  ;  although  I  find  since  that  he 
had  joined  in  the  Decree  at  the  Synod,  a  matter  which  he  was  wise  enough 
to  conceal  from  me.  But  now,  if  even  he  was  so  compassionate,  much  more 
may  we,  since  you  arc  a  sufferer  for  our  Liturgy  ;  and  therefore  we  have  all 
the  reason  in  the  world  to  receive  you  and  yours  under  our  protection ;  and 
you  may  depend  upon  all  the  assistance  and  encouragement  I  am  capable 
of  giving  you. 

I  had  seen  Mr.  Dundass's  Piece  before,  which  shews  him  to  be  a  person 
of  good  sense  and  learning,  and  courage  too,  so  gallantly  to  bear  up  against 
the  wrath  of  his  Oppressors.  I  am  very  much  of  his  opinion  about  Prayers 
for  the  Dead,  as  you  will  find  by  a  Piece  lately  Published  at  Edr.  As  to  the 
Mixture,  I  think  the  proof  brought  from  Mr.  Collier's  Dictionary,  that  it  was 
not  practised  in  the  Apostle's  time,  is  very  weak,  it  being  taken  from  the 
Liber  J'uiitijiculis,  written  in  the  Oth  Century,  and  therefore  of  no  authority. 
I  humbly  conceive  that  Justin  Martyr's  informing  the  Bom.  Emperor  that 
the  Mixture  was  then  used  universally  by  the  Christians  (for  he  makes  no 
exception),  is  a  very  probable  argument  for  the  Apostolical  practice.  But 
then  every  Apostolical  practice  is  not  necessary,  unless  it  be  delivered  in 
Scripture,  which  is  the  only  rule  to  acquaint  us  what  is  essential  either  in 
doctrine  or  practice.  'Tis  probable,  likewise,  our  Saviour's  Wine  was  mixed, 
because  such  sort  of  Wine  was  frequently  used  in  these  warm  Countrys,  and 
at  the  Paschal  Supper ;  but  the  Fruit  of  the  Vine  is  only  mentioned,  and 
therefore  it  alone  is  the  essential  matter  of  the  Cup ;  and  there  is  great 
difference  between  Probability  and  Necessity.  'Tis  then,  I  imagine,  a  thing 
indifferent  whether  the  Cup  have  pure  or  mixed  Wine  in  it ;  and  if  people 
chuse  the  one  sort  of  Wine  rather  than  the  other,  I  should  think  there  need 
be  no  great  dispute  about  it.  As  to  the  other  points,  you  will  see  my  sense 
of  them  in  the  piece  above  mentioned. 

With  my  most  earnest  Prayers  for  you  all,  both  Pastor  and  People,  that 
God  would  defend  you  against  all  violence  and  oppression,  and  hap  you 
under  the  shadow  of  His  wings,  untill  this  tyranny  be  overpast ;  and  that 
you  may  with  courage  and  constancy  persevere  (as  you  do)  in  the  Orthodox 
Communion  of  your  own  National  Church,  as  'tis  by  Law  established,  the 


EOBEKT  KEITH.  228 

faithful  Members  of  which  alone,  and  no  others,  are  in  Communion  with  the 
Church  of  England.     lam,  E.  S., 

Your  very  affect.  Brother  and  Servant, 

(Signed)  GEO.  SMITH. 

II.   Bishop  Smith  to  3/>.  David  Fife,  Xoccmler  12,  1744. 

Eevd.  Sir, — I  received  yours  of  the  2d  October,  and  am  oblidg'd  to  you 
for  the  Account  you  give  of  the  irregular  Promotion  of  severall  of  your 
Bishops,  which  is  a  piece  of  history  I  was  not  thoroughly  acquainted  with. 
You  are  pleased  to  desire  my  opinion  in  severall  tilings,  and  first,  with 
regard  to  Mr.  liaitt,  I  think  it  is  very  clear  that  his  setting  up  a  Conventicle 
many  years  ago,  in  opposition  to  Bishop  Ouchterlony,  was  highly  schis- 
maticall.  But  I'm  inform'd  that  upon  making  the  Concordate,  or  at  least 
severall  years  before  that  worthy  Bishop  Died,  he  admitted  Mr.  Eaitt  to  his 
Communion,  and  allowed  him  as  one  of  his  Presbyters.  If  this  be  true,  I 
conceive  that  after  his  reconciliation  with  his  Bishop,  he  could  not  be  said 
to  be  in  a  state  of  schism ;  and  consequently,  he  being  thus  rcctux  in  curia, 
he  might  be  lawfully  promoted  to  the  Episcopate. 

2dly.  It  appears  that  there  were  severall  Presbyters  irregularly  and 
schismatically  Consecrated,  such  as  Mr.  Eattray,  Dunbar,  and  Keith ;  but, 
as  I  take  it,  this  breach  was  afterwards  made  up  by  the  Concordate,  and  the 
irregularity  discharg'd  by  those  lawfull  Bishops,  who  had,  as  I  suppose, 
authority  to  do  so,  in  order  thereby  to  restore  peace  to  the  Church.  And  as 
to  Mr.  White's  promotion,  whatever  irregularity  there  might  be  in  it,  or 
opposition  made  against  it  at  first,  yet  I  am  told  that  afterwards  his  Epis- 
copall  character  was  acknowledged  both  by  the  Primus  and  Bishop  Ouchter 
lony,  or  at  least  by  the  survivors  of  them ;  and  if  that  were  so,  there  could 
be  no  further  objection  against  him.  And  with  regard  to  the  other  Bishops, 
who  were  afterwards  Consecrated,  I  don't  see  that  any  just  exception  can  ly 
against  their  Promotion.  What  I  have  to  except  against  them  all  is  this — 
that  by  making  and  imposing  new  Canons  contrary  to  the  Canons  and  Laws 
of  your  Established  Church,  and  their  own  most  solemn  vows  at  their 
Ordination  and  Consecration,  they  have  ceased  to  be  true  members  of  it, 
as  lawfull  Bishops  thereof.  They  have  set  up  a  new  Church  of  their  own  in 
opposition  to  the  Nationall,  and  therfore  are  not  in  Communion  with  it, 
nor  with  the  Church  of  England,  which  acknowledges  no  other  Communion 
as  lawfull  but  that  of  the  Nationall  Church,  as  it  is  established  among  you, 
both  by  the  Canons  of  your  former  and  regular  Synods,  and  the  Laws  of  the 
Eealm  confirming  those  Canons.  Xow,  all  your  Bishops  have  unnecessarily, 
and  without  any  colour  of  reason,  broke  the  Constitution  of  your  Church, 
and  are  therefore  guilty  of  Schism  and  Eebellion — Schism  in  oposing  the 
superior  authority  of  a  Nationall  Synod,  and  Eebellion  in  violating  the  just 
Laws  of  the  Eealm.  And  since  it  also  appears  that  they  look  upon  those 
Usages  as  essential  to  the  administration  of  the  Holy  Eucharist,  and  reject 
the  Office  of  our  Church,  upon  pretence  of  wanting  them  ;  and  particularly, 
since  Bishop  Eaitt  declared  he  was  not  in  Communion  with  our  Church  and 
had  nothing  to  doe  with  it — this  is  a  further  demonstration  of  their  Schism. 
These  are  the  reasons  that  are  of  weight  with  me,  to  believe  them  not  to  be 
our  Communion,  and  to  have  no  farther  commerce  with  such  as  have  in 
volved  themselves  in  such  notorious  crimes. 


224  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

On  the  26th  June  las1:,  I  wrote  at  large  upon  this  melancholy  affair  to 
the  Primus,  and  sent  a  proposall  for  the  composing  your  differences,  in  which 
two  of  my  Colleagues  joined  with  me.  The  proposnil  is  as  followes  : — 

1st.  That  you  suspend,  .s7/,v  die,  the  Execution  of  all  new  Canons,  as 
being  made  contrary  to  your  Xationall  Church  Constitution  ;  and  that  you 
never  attempt  the  like  for  the  time  to  come,  but  content  yourselves  wiih  the 
laudable  example  of  your  Predecessors,  with  executing  the  old  ones  already 
Legally  and  Canonically  enacted  ;  and  that  in  all  your  future  consultations 
you  consider  only  of  the  best  means  of  doing  so. 

2dly.  That  you'll  establish  the  first  Article  of  the  Concordate,  wherein 
the  two  Liturgies  are  put  upon  an  equall  foot ;  and  that  in  order  to  the  true 
and  right  observation  of  that  Article,  you  direct  all  the  Clergy  not  to  deviate 
in  the  least  tittle  from  the  Words  or  Puibrick  of  either  of  them,  by  either 
adding  to,  or  mutilating,  or  transposing  any  part  thcroff ;  and  for  the  stop 
ping  all  misapprehensions,  that  you,  and  all  Presbyters  using  the  Scotish 
Liturgy,  shall  at  least  once  a  year  Officiate  by  the  English,  to  demonstrate 
your  perfect  agreement  and  Communion  with  the  Church  of  England,  and 
that  you  will  declare  that  you  will  Communicate  indifferently  where  either 
Liturgy  is  used;  and  lastly,  that  you  will  make  no  alteration  in  any  other 
part  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  or  in  the  Form  of  Ordination,  but  will, 
in  the  Consecration  of  Bishops,  cither  use  the  Scotish  or  English  Forms, 
and  in  the  Ordination  of  Priests  and  Deacons  the  English  only. 

3dly.  That  to  shew  your  earnest  desire  of  perfectly  establishing  the 
peace  and  unity  of  the  Church,  you  will  please  to  declare  that,  cither  out  of 
your  own  free  grace  and  favour,  or  upon  our  request  and  mediation,  which 
you  will,  you  are  willing  to  release  the  rigour  of  Discipline,  and  to  receive 
any  Clergyman,  in  his  proper  character  and  station,  and  his  people  to  Com 
munion,  who  having  been  guilty  of  no  other  crime  but  simply  separating 
from  you,  or  who,  being  under  censure  for  such  separation  only,  shall  return 
to  your  Communion. 

To  this  proposall.  made  by  three  of  us,  they  never  yet  vouchsafed  to 
return  any  answer,  and  I  dare  say  never  will — the  consequence  of  which  is 
that  they 'resolve  to  persist  in  their  Schism  and  Eebellion;  and  they  being 
thus  separated  both  from  your  own  Nationall  Church  and  from  ours,  which 
is  in  Communion  with  it,  we  cannot  look  upon  them  as  rightfull  Bishops,  or 
believe  that  any  obedience  is  due  to  them  from  the  Clergy  and  people.  You 
doe  well,  therefore,  in  opposing  their  pretended  authority ;  and  so  long  as 
you  do  so,  and  strictly  adhere  to  the  Liturgy  and  Communion  of  our  Church, 
I  doubt  not  but  God  will  give  a  blessing  to  your  administrations,  and  abun 
dantly  supply  the  defect  of  a  lawfull  Bishop  among  you,  for  which  you  shall 
never  want  my  fervent  prayers.  You  desire  to  know  how  to  do  with  those 
who  were  never  Confirmed,  when  they  desire  to  Communicate  at  the  Lord's 
Table.  To  this  I  answer,  that  the  Kubrick  at  the  end  of  the  Office  for  Con 
firmation,  gives  a  sufficient  direction  what  is  to  be  done  in  your  circum 
stances.  The  Piubrick  says  that  none  shall  be  admitted  to  the  Holy 
Communion  untill  such  time  as  he  bo  Confirmed,  or  be  ready  or  be  desirous 
to  be  Confirmed. 

Now,  seeing  it  is  an  act  of  Schism,  and  therefore  criminall,  to  seek 
Confirmation  from  the  hands  of  schismaticall  Bishops,  and  you  can't  have 
this  Holy  Pdte  administred  by  a  lawfull  Bishop  on  account  of  your  great 
distance  'from  one,  in  this  case  of  necessity,  being  ready  and  desirous  to  be 


ROBERT  KEITH,  225 

Confirmed  is  sufficient  for  admission  to  the  Holy  Communion ;  and  there  is 
no  reason  to  doubt  but  God  will  graciously  accept  the  will  for  the  deed. 
You  will  please  to  return  Doctor  Colvill  thanks  for  his  kind  Letter,  and  with 
my  best  respects  to  him  and  Mr.  Dundass,  and  my  hearty  prayers  that  God 
would  give  you  grace  and  courage  to  persevere  in  the  truth,  I  am, 

Revel.  Sir, 
Your  very  affectionate  Brother  and  Servt., 

(Sic  Subr)  G.  SMITH. 

III.   Bishop  Smith  to  Mr.  David  Fife,  19th  February,  1745. 

Reverend  Sir, — I  received  yours  of  29th  January,  and  do  assure  you  I 
am  not  under  the  least  concern,  upon  my  own  account,  at  the  rough  treat 
ment  Mr.  Raitt  has  been  pleased  to  bestow  upon  me  in  such  a  plentiful 
manner.  It  is  my  opinion  he  has  done  himself  and  his  cause  more  harm  by 
it  than  me.  He  would  gladly  make  it  a  National  Quarrel ;  and  he  and  his 
Party  would  fain  have  it  believed,  that  my  interposing  in  your  affairs  tends 
to  overthrow  the  Independency  of  your  Church.  But  he  has  not  the  least 
grounds  to  raise  such  a  clamour,  I  having  asserted  it  as  strongly  as  possible 
in  my  late  Letter  Printed  at  Edinburgh  ;  and  done  no  more  than  the  duty 
of  every  Catholick  Bishop  in  such  a  case  as  this,  when  the  Bishops  in  a 
Nation  have  unwarrantably  made  a  breach  in  their  own,  and  refuse  Com 
munion  with  their  Sister  Church ;  of  which  this  is  a  manifest  token  that 
they  clearly  enough,  in  this  very  Pamphlet,  declare  that  some  Doctrines, 
intrinsic  to  the  Holy  Eucharist,  are  not  so  much  as  implied  in  her  Com 
munion  Office  ;  and  that  therefore  it  is  not  lawful  to  Communicate  with  her 
in  the  highest  act  of  religious  Worship. 

The  "  dear  Implication  scheme,"  as  Mr.  Raitt  is  pleased  to  call  it,  is 
here  apparently  ridiculed,  and  is  intimated  to  be  contrary  to  the  authentick 
Deeds  of  our  Church,  which  he  most  untruly  pretends  I  have  set  at  open 
variance  to  promote  it.  I  acknowledge  he  has  acted  more  like  an  honest 
man  than  the  rest  of  his  Brethren,  in  not  saying  in  his  Declaration,  as  they 
have  done  in  theirs,  that  he  is  in  full  Communion  with  the  Church  of  Eng 
land.  He,  indeed,  as  well  as  they,  can,  it  seems,  tolerate  the  use  of  our 
Office,  though  they  will  not  Communicate  when  and  where  it  is  used.  But 
whether  tolerating  an  invalid  Sacrament,  or  rather  a  sacrilegious  mockery 
instead  of  a  Sacrament,  as  these  gentlemen  must  think  it,  can  be  so  much 
as  palliated,  much  less  justified,  I  leave  them  to  consider. 

It  is  very  well  that  the  Narrative  will  soon  be  ready,  and  I  hope  thereby 
Mr.  Raitt's  Account  of  the  case  will  be  thoroughly  confuted.  I  could  wish 
to  see  it  soon,  that  I  may  make  a  proper  use  of  it  in  the  Answer  I  am 
preparing  to  Mr.  Raitt's  Pamphlet.  I  presume  Mr.  Dundass  will  immedi 
ately  set  about  a  Reply,  and  doubt  not  but  he  will  be  able  so  fully  to  clear 
up  the  affair,  as  to  satisfy  all  unprejudiced  persons. 

As  to  my  Letters  which  Mr.  Raitt  has  Published,  I  am  not  at  all  dis 
pleased  at  the  event,  but  rather  otherwise ;  because  therein  are  contained, 
in  short,  the  reasons  why  these  gentlemen  (notwithstanding  the  validity  of 
their  Ordination,  which  all  schismatical  Bishops  have)  have  no  right  to  the 
obedience  of  the  Clergy  and  People ;  as  neither  being  Bishops  of  your 
National  Church,  nor  in  Communion  with  ours.  And  I  am  so  little 
solicitous  about  your  keeping  up  my  Letters,  that  you  are  very  welcome  to 
VOL.  n.  2  F 


22G  DISTEICT  OF  FIFE. 

show  them  to  whomsoever  you  think  fit ;  that  Mr.  Eaitt,  if  he  pleases,  may 
Print  them  in  his  next  publick  performance. 

Mr.  Eaitt,  p.  90,  complains  that  I  did  not  communicate  first  to  himself 
any  impressions  or  informations  I  might  have  received  to  his  prejudice  about 
your  affair.  Now,  lie  has  no  just  reason  to  make  this  complaint ;  for  on  the 
9 th  of  October,  1743,  I  wrote 'to  Mr.  Keith,  in  order  to  be  communicated  to 
all  his  Colleagues,  a  Letter  penned  in  the  most  humble  and  submissive 
Language,  and  therein  interceded  for  you  in  the  most  suppliant  manner; 
and  proposed,  as  I  imagined,  a  very  proper  and  easy  method  to  compose  the 
difference.  Soon  after  Mr.  Keith  had  received  my  Letter,  Mr.  Alexander,  at 
his  desire,  went  to  Dundee,  and  told  Mr.  Eaitt  what  I  had  advised  ;  but  Mr. 
Eaitt  would  not  listen  to  it,  although  several  of  his  friends  there,  as  well  as 
Mr.  Alexander,  endeavoured  to  persuade  him.  Is  it  not  plain  then,  that  my 
sentiments  and  advice,  wherein  I  spoke  the  mind  of  my  Colleagues  here,  as 
Avell  as  my  own,  were  communicated  to  him ;  and  although  most  civilly  and 
candidly  offered,  were  entirely  disregarded?  I  therefore  had  all  the_  reason 
in  the  world  to  believe  it  was  to  no  manner  of  purpose  to  intercede  with  him 
in  your  behalf,  or  trouble  either  him  or  any  body  else  any  farther  about  it. 
And  to  let  you  see  how  little  cause  he  has  to  quarrel  with  my  conduct  upon 
this  account,  I  will  here  transcribe  that  part  of  my  Letter  which  principally 
relates  to  this  melancholy  business. 

"  It  is  a  great  pity  you  were  not  with  the  rest  of  your  Colleagues  at  the 
consult  about  this  unhappy  Deposition  ;  for  then  a  person  of  your  pacifick 
temper,  joining  with  the  other  two  Bishops  who  were  against  it  at  first, 
might  have  been  able  to  prevail  with  Bishop  Eaitt  (who  I  readily  acknow 
ledge  was  sufficiently  provoked  to  take  the  severest  course),  to  set  a  noble 
example  of  a  patient  and  forgiving  disposition,  and  to  despise  this  personal 
affront  and  injury,  especially  it  being  apparent  the  peace  of  the  Church  is 
so  much  at  stake.  I  still  have  reason  to  hope,  from  the  excellent  character 
he  bears,  that  upon  a  due  consideration  of  all  circumstances,  and  particu 
larly  upon  a  view  of  the  very  bad  consequences  which  may  ensue,  he  will  be 
pleased,  upon  Mr.  Fife's  humble  submission  to  his  authority,  and  promise  of 
a  faithful  obedience  for  the  future,  which  you  informed  me  he  was  ready  to 
make,  to  take  off,  with  the  concurrence  of  his  Colleagues,  the  heavy  censure 
Mr.  Fife  now  lies  under,  and  then  permit  him  to  officiate  in  the  Congrega 
tion  he  is  possessed  of,  in  the  same  manner  as  Bishop  Ouchterlonie  used  to 
do  formerly.  This,  I  am  sure,  will  gain  our  worthy  Colleague  the  hearts  of 
many,  who  now,  I  fear,  think  hardly  of  him  upon  this  account,  and  will 
make  his  name  reverenced  by  all  good  men,  who  will  everywhere  speak  of 
him  with  the  highest  honour  and  respect,  for  sacrificing  his  own  private 
resentment  to  the  public  peace  and  tranquillity.  What  I  here  request  in 
Mr.  Fife's  behalf,  is  undoubtedly  in  the  Bishop's  power  to  grant ;  and  since  a 
person  of  his  good  sense  and  eminent  virtue  cannot  but  have  an  earnest  desire 
to  see  unity  entirely  restored,  which  will  be  both  a  great  comfort  to  himself 
and  an  infinite  blessing  to  the  Flock  over  which  he  presides  ;  and  which 
cannot,  as  far  as  I  can  discern,  be  effected  any  other  way  ;  I  am  willing  to 
assure  myself  he  will  need  little  persuasion  to  do  his  part  in  making  up  the 
breach.  And  if  he  will  be  so  good  as  grant  this  favour  at  the  intercession 
of  you  and  his  other  Colleagues,  and  upon  my  Irumble  application  to  him, 
which  I  hereby  make  through  your  means,  I  dare  say  it  will  be  no  small 
pleasure  to  you,  and  it  will  be  sure  to  meet  with  my  grateful  acknowledg- 


ROBEET  KEITH.  227 

ment.  That  it  would  bo  very  acceptable  to  you,  1  conclude  from  your  com 
miserating  this  unhappy  man's  case,  when  you  discoursed  with  me  about 
him,  and  from  your  saying  that  the  people  could  not  now  in  honour  desert 
him,  by  accepting  Mr.  Raitt's  proposal  of  having  any  other  Minister  they 
pleased  set  over  them,  and  so  leaving  him  destitute  of  all  support  and  main 
tenance.  This  is  a  thing  they  cannot,  now  they  have  called  him,  in  any 
reason  comply  with  ;  and  I  question  not  but  by  this  time  your  worthy  Col 
league  is  sensible  of  it.  I  had  not  spoke  one  word  in  Mr.  Fife's  behalf,  but 
that  you  assured  me  he  was  in  all  other  respects,  a  man  of  an  unexception 
able  character.  I  hope,  then,  his  former  merits,  and  present  good  qualities 
and  capacities,  may  in  some  degree  plead  for  him  ;  and,  considering  your 
Church  is  not  overstocked  with  Clergy,  it  would  upon  that  account  be  well 
if  he  were  restored  to  his  station. 

"  I  thought  to  have  made  an  end  here,  but  since  I  know  you  expect  to 
have  my  thoughts  concerning  the  principal  parts  of  Bishop  Eaitt's  Letter,  I 
must  beg  your  patience  a  little  longer,  being  willing  to  make  you  a  full 
discovery  of  my  whole  sentiments,  as  far  as  I  can  remember  the  contents  of 
it.  I  speak  to  you  as  my  friend,  whom  I  highly  esteem,  with  all  imaginable 
frankness.  If  therefore  I  chance  to  say  anything  cross  to  your  opinion,  I 
persuade  myself  you  will  take  no  offence  at  it.  As  I  said  before,  I  here  again 
declare,  that  Mr.  Fife's  conduct  is  by  no  means  to  be  justified ;  but  yet  I 
cannot  but  conceive  his  fault  will  admit  of  some  alleviation.  I  remember 
Mr.  Raitt  gives  an  account  that  there  were  two  Congregations  at  Dundee, 
over  one  of  which  Bishop  Ouchterlonic  presided,  who,  I  believe,  always  used 
the  English  Liturgy.  In  the  beginning  of  this  year,  Bishop  Eaitt,  who,  I 
suppose,  prefers  the  Scots  Liturgy,  endeavoured  to  unite  both  Congregations, 
to  Avhich  Union  a  Meeting  of  the  chief  persons  of  both  Congregations  agreed. 
But  upon  second  thoughts  they  perceived  that  the  English  Liturgy  would  be 
entirely  excluded  at  Dundee  ;  and  this,  as  I  take  it,  was  the  ground  of  the 
tjuarrel.  Hereupon  many  of  them  applied  to  the  Bishop,  and  desired  they 
might  be  in  the  same  state  they  were  in  Bishop  Ouchterlonie's  time,  and 
have  a  Minister  who  would  use  the  English  Liturgy  as  before.  But  the 
Bishop,  insisting  upon  the  Union  of  the  Congregations,  asked  them  whether 
they  owned  him  for  their  Bishop  '?  To  which  they  answered  they  were  of 
the  Communion  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  rejected  his  authority, 
supposing,  I  presume,  that  he  rejected  the  Communion  of  the  Church  of 
England  by  his  not  complying  with  their  request  for  that  Church's  Liturgy, 
and  only  officiating  by  the  [Scottish.  Now,  in  reply  to  this  he  should,  I 
humbly  conceive,  have  told  them  he  did  not  reject  the  Communion  of  the 
Church  of  England,  as  appears  by  his  approving  the  use  of  the  English 
Liturgy  in  the  first  Article  of  the  late  Concordatc,  which  he  still  stands  by, 
and  by  his  never  refusing  to  join  it  in  those  Congregations  where  that 
Communion  Office  was  constantly  officiated  by,  although  he  rather  chose 
himself  to  minister  by  the  Scottish  Office,  as  he  was  warranted  to  do  by  the 
said  first  Article  of  the  Agreement.  Something  of  this  kind  said,  would 
have  given  them  to  understand  that  he  looked  upon  both  Liturgies  to  be  in 
substance  and  meaning  the  same,  and  that  he  and  our  Church  were  of  the 
same  Communion ;  and  it  is  not  unlikely  this  would  have  pacified  them,  or 
at  least  would  have  rendered  them  the  more  inexcusable.  But  I  do  not 
remember  he  says  anything  in  his  Letter,  from  whence  one  may  gather  he 
gave  them  this  satisfaction.  And  yet  I  cannot  but  be  of  opinion  he  was 


228  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

short  iu  this  ;  and  he  should  have  taken  special  care  to  obviate  and  prevent 
every  scruple  and  suspicion  of  theirs  upon  this  score  ;  which,  if  he  neglected 
to  do,  it  was  certainly  a  very  great  omission.  For  what  effect  could  this 
have  but  to  induce  them  to  believe  that  neither  he  nor  his  Colleagues,  if 
they  were  all  of  one  mind,  held  Communion  with  us,  whom  they  have 
hitherto  esteemed  a  sound  part  of  the  Catholic  Church  ;  or  that  he,  at  least, 
had  condemned  our  Liturgy,  and  thereby  broke  off  all  fraternal  Correspon 
dence  with  us  '?  And  what  could  naturally  follow  from  this,  but  that  the 
people  should  imagine  there  was  a  direct  Schism  commenced  between  him 
and  all  those,  whether  of  your  or  our  Church,  who  either  used  or  approved 
the  use  of  the  English  Liturgy  ?  Thus,  as  it  seems  to  me,  there  were  great 
mistakes  on  both  sides ;  on  theirs,  for  supposing  he  had  broke  Communion 
with  our  Church,  with  whom  they  were  united  ;  and  on  his,  for  not  openly 
confuting  that  calumny,  as  I,  in  charity  and  respect  to  him,  believe  it  to  be. 
It  is  plain  they  thought  their  Bishop  was  not  of  the  same  Communion  with 
them,  /.c.,  was  not  in  Communion  with  the  Church  of  England.  Now, 
though  this,  I  make  no  question,  was  a  very  wrong  judgment  in  them;  yet, 
since  they  were  unfortunately  prepossessed  with  this  notion,  as  appears  from 
the  Bishop's  Letter  they  probably  were,  there  is  the  less  wonder  they  should 
act  in  this  disrespectful  manner.  But  now,  if  our  dear  Brother  will,  in 
Christian  meekness,  so  far  condescend  as  to  declare  to  Mr.  Fife  and  his 
people  his  approbation  of  the  use  of  our  Liturgy,  and  that  he  is  very  far 
from  intending  to  reject  our  Communion  by  his  using  the  Scottish,  and  will 
please  to  receive  them  into  favour  upon  their  submission ;  and,  to  shew  he 
has  no  discs! com  for  our  Church,  allow  of  Mr.  Fife's  Ministry  among  them 
by  our  Liturgy, — this  will  be  the  most  easy  and  natural  method  to  compose 
the  difference,  and  set  the  minds  of  all  those  in  your  Church  at  ease,  who 
are  now  greatly  disturbed  and  uneasy  at  this  rigorous  censure. 

"  You  and  your  worthy  Colleagues  will  pardon  me  if  I,  considering  the 
station  wherein  the  Providence  of  God  has  placed  me,  though  very  un 
worthy  of  it,  cannot  blame  Mr.  Fife  and  his  Adherents'  just  esteem  for  our 
excellent  Liturgy,  and  zeal  for  continuing  in  our  Communion  ;  and  there 
fore,  with  some  earnestness,  interpose  in  their  behalf.  And  as  I  shall 
always  be  ready  to  assist  you  iu  supporting  your  authority,  and  dissuading 
people,  upon  any  pretence  of  this  sort,  from  making  dissensions  in  your 
Church  ;  so  I  hope  you  will,  in  charity  to  us,  and  compassion  to  your  own 
Flock,  be  very  careful  of  giving  them  the  least  occasion  for  receiving  any 
such  ill  impressions  of  you  ;  and,  as  an  earnest  of  this,  will  vouchsafe  to 
cancel  this  Deposition,  which,  as  it  was  too  hastily  and  precipitately  issued 
out,  so  it  cannot  be  too  speedily  discharged  and  annulled." 

And  now  let  every  man  of  sense  judge,  after  reading  of  this,  whether  I 
have  been  in  the  least  wanting  in  due  respect  to  Mr.  Raitt  on  this  unhappy 
occasion,  and  whether  I  did  not  take  a  very  proper  method  fairly  and  frankly 
to  communicate  my  thoughts  to  him.  But  he  was  deaf  to  every  thing  both 
I  and  others  could  say  ;  and  being  hurried  away  by  a  strong  resentment  and 
the  warmth  of  his  own  temper,  and  spirited  up  by  his  Colleague,  Mr.  White, 
still  continued  resolved  to  push  matters  to  extremity;  insomuch  that  he,  in 
conjunction  Avith  the  other,  was  very  angry  even  with  Mr.  Keith  for  not 
reading  your  Deprivation  publickly  in  his  Chapel,  and  took  his  not  going  all 
their  lengths  in  this  matter  very  much  amiss.  All  this  I  had  undoubted 
intelligence  of,  even  by  the  means  of  a  hearty  friend  to  these  gentlemen. 


ROBERT  KEITH.  229 

What  encouragement  then  had  I  to  make  any  farther  application  to  Mr. 
Raitt  ?  And  what  room  is  there  for  his  accusing  me  of  not  doing  it  ?  If  he 
would  not  hearken  to  the  earnest  intreaties  of  his  Colleagues  there,  was  it 
possible  for  me  to  expect  that  anything  I  could  say  would  have  better 
success  ? 

When  I  wrote  the  above  Letter  to  Mr.  Keith,  who  had  taken  pains  to 
give  me  such  information  about  your  case  as  might  put  the  best  gloss  upon 
the  proceedings  of  his  Colleagues — which  yet  did  then  seem  so  harsh  even 
to  himself  that  he  could  not  but  declare  his  disapprobation  of  them,  and 
who,  you  may  be  sure,  did  his  utmost  to  imprint  on  my  mind  the  most 
favourable  opinion  of  Mr.  Eaitt — I  was  very  desirous  to  believe  this  gentle 
man  was  not  a  declared  enemy  to  our  Church,  and  upon  that  supposition 
said  your  conduct  was  not  to  be  justified.  But  the  share  he  had  in  the 
transactions  of  the  late  Synod,  and  most  especially  his  late  Pamphlet,  have 
fully  discovered  his  rooted  aversion  to  our  excellent  and  Catholick  Office  ; 
and  therefore  he  cannot,  with  any  reason,  expect  we  should  look  upon  him 
as  of  the  same  Communion  with  the  Church  of  England,  which  it  seems  is 
not  Catholick  enough  for  him,  and  from  which  he  has  manifestly  separated 
by  setting  up  his  Office  and  Altar  against  her's. 

And  upon  this  account  I  now  think  myself  bound,  in  the  most  publick 
manner,  to  profess  that  the  conduct  of  you  and  all  the  worthy  members  of 
your  Congregation,  who  will  not  suffer  yourselves  to  be  compelled  to  go  out 
from  us  by  the  violent  persecution  of  your  and  our  common  adversaries,  but 
are  resolved  faithfully  to  continue  with  us  in  all  events,  is  so  far  from  being 
blameworthy,  that  it  justly  merits  the  highest  commendation  and  applause. 
Go  on,  then,  in  the  name  of  God,  to  do  your  duty ;  maugre  all  the  menaces 
and  rage  of  your  persecutors,  who,  being  not  Members  of  the  true  Com 
munion,  cannot  have  the  lawful  aiithority  of  Bishops  in  it.  And  since  their 
censures  are  altogether  ineffectual  to  all  Spiritual  purposes,  your  sacerdotal 
character  is  no  more  hurt  or  impaired  by  them  than  if  Romish,  Novation,  or 
Donatist  Bishops  had  passed  sentence  upon  you. 

You  will  observe,  in  the  above  written  Transcript,  several  particulars 
which  passed  in  conversation  betwixt  Mr.  Keith  and  me.  Now,  he  never 
pretended  to  deny  any  of  them ;  but  in  his  Answer  to  my  Letter  would 
fain  bring  himself  off  by  saying  I  mistook  his  meaning.  For  instance, 
with  regard  to  one  of  the  remarkable  passages,  he  would  excuse  the 
matter  thus — "For  my  saying  the  people  of  Dundee  could  not  now  in 
honour  desert  Mr.  Fife,  I  only  narrated  what  I  knew  these  people  had 
declared  to  two  of  my  Brethren,  who  had  communed  with  them  on  that 
affair,  though  indeed  I  did  not  acquaint  you  that  I  had  those  Accounts."  I 
must  own  I  was  very  much  shocked  at  this  ;  for  he  spoke  those  words  as  his 
own  sense  of  that  matter,  and  not  as  the  Declaration  of  others.  He  did  not 
then  qualify  his  discourse  as  he  does  here  in  his  Letter ;  and  he  himself 
acknowledges  as  much,  confessing  he  did  not  acquaint  me  with  such 
Accounts  of  that  affair  as,  if  he  had,  could  not  but  have  induced  me  to  take 
him,  not  in  an  absolute,  but  in  a  limited  sense.  In  short,  he  did  not  nar 
rate  what  others  said,  but  spoke,  in  all  appearance,  his  own  mind  freely. 
What  secret  mental  reservation  he  might  have,  himself  best  knows.  This 
gave  me  no  very  favourable  impression  of  my  Correspondent's  sincere  deal 
ing.  But  when,  about  two  months  after,  the  Minutes  of  the  late  Synod 
came  into  my  hands,  the  Transactions  of  which  he  had  carefully  concealed 


280  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

from  me,  and  I  there  saw  that  he  was  as  much  concerned  as  any  of  the  rest 
in  agreeing  to  concur  in  the  Sentence  of  Deposition.  I  must  confess  I  was 
quite  astonished ;  and  this  I  sufficiently  discovered  in  my  Letter  to  Mr. 
Mackenzie.  What,  thought  I,  could  this  gentleman,  who  so  much  declared 
his  displeasure  at  the  conduct  of  his  Brethren  for  passing  this  Censure,  he 
himself  the  head  of  those  who  decreed  it  ?  This  was  a  contradiction  I  could 
by  no  means  reconcile.  He  is  self-condemned,  as  Mr.  Raitt  very  truly 
observes  ;  and  because  I  have  taken  the  freedom  to  tell  him  so,  he  is  now 
become  my  professed  enemy,  and  uses  all  the  mean  arts  he  is  master  of  to 
defame  me.  If  Mr.  Raitt  will  have  it,  that  his  testimony  is  good  for  nothing, 
because  he  is  self-condemned,  I  shall  by  no  means  say  anything  to  the 
contrary ;  and  his  informing  me  that  the  quarrel  was  about  the  Liturgy,  I 
agree,  shall  be  accounted  of  no  signiticancy  for  the  future. 

As  for  his  clamours  that  I  have  acted  against  the  Independency  of  your 
Church,  they  arc  altogether  vain  and  ridiculous,  and  a  mere  imposition  upon 
the  common  sense  of  mankind.  I  am  as  fully  satisfied,  and  upon  very  good 
grounds  too,  of  the  truth  of  that  as  any  man  breathing.  And  therefore,  in 
conjunction  with  others,  who  have  desired  my  assistance  in  so  good  a  cause, 
I  have  been  long  endeavouring  to  maintain  and  preserve  its  Canons,  and  the 
Laws  which  establish  it,  and  the  Rights  and  Privileges  of  all  its  Members, 
against  the  violent  attacks  of  those  who  would  set  them  aside.  I  am  against 
no  other  Independency  but  that  which  those  gentlemen  so  earnestly  contend 
for,  who  would  be  independent  of  the  established  Canons  and  Laws,  and 
will  by  no  means  submit  to  them  ;  although,  when  they  were  Ordained,  they 
most  solemnly  avowed  that,  by  the  help  of  God,  they  would  give  faithful 
diligence  always  to  minister  the  Discipline  of  Christ,  as  the  Lord  hath  com 
manded,  and  as  your  Church  and  Realm  hath  received  the  same,  according 
to  the  Commandments  of  God;  and,  when  they  were  Consecrated,  that  the 
criminous  they  would  correct  and  punish,  according  to  such  authority  as 
they  have  by  the  Word,  and  as  to  them  shall  be  committed  by  the  Ordinance 
of  your  Realm.  Let  them  but  make  the  Laws  of  their  Independent  Church 
and  Realm  their  Rule,  in  subordination  to  the  Law  of  God,  in  all  possible 
cases  (for  nemo  It'iietur  ad  iin/io.^ilii/c),  and  this  will  put  an  end  to  all  disputes. 
But,  unless  they  will  vouchsafe  to  do  this,  I,  though  a  stranger,  will  be 
found  in  the  end  a  much  better  friend  to  Scotland  than  those  Natives  who 
are  obstinately  bent  on  disobeying  the  Laws  of  it ;  who,  in  the  eyes  of  all 
honest  Scotsmen,  must  appear  as  open  disturbers  of  the  publick  peace,  and 
cannot  be  esteemed  true  Bishops  of  that  National  Church,  against  which 
they  are  in  manifest  rebellion. 

The  National  Church  of  Scotland  is  in  Communion  with  the  Church  of 
England,  and  has  made  her  Liturgy,  particularly  the  Communion  Ofiice, 
her  own.  But  these  gentlemen  are  for  throwing  out  this  Office  with  all 
possible  speed,  as  defective  in  points  essential  to  the  Administration.  They 
therefore  will  not  Communicate  with  the  Church  of  England  in  the  highest 
solemnity  of  Christian  Worship  ;  consequently  cannot  belong  to  the  Church 
of  Scotland.  They  are  of  a  Church  of  a  new  cut,  and  therfore  all  their  Acts 
are  null  and  void,  as  to  spiritual  effect ;  and  their  Censures  are  no  more  to 
be  regarded  than  if  they  were  inflicted  by  Bishops  of  the  Popish  or  any  other 
schismatical  Communion.  You  and  your  People  at  Dundee,  whatever  else 
may  be  pretended,  were  censured  for  adhering  to  the  English  Office,  by  a 
Bishop  who  will  not  Communicate  in  the  use  of  it,  because,  in  his  opinion, 


ROBERT  KEITH.  231 

it  does  not  contain  all  the  Doctrines  intrinsick  to  the  Divine  Ordinance. 
His  Censure  therefore  was  invalid,  because  he  was  a  Bishop  of  another 
Communion,  and  not  of  that  of  the  National  Church,  which  is  in  Com 
munion  with  the  Church  of  England. 

If  he  had  been  in  full  Communion  with  us,  he  would  not  surely  have 
failed,  somewhere  in  his  Book,  to  have  given  us  full  satisfaction  in  the  point. 
He  would  not  have  failed  to  declare  that  our  Office  wants  nothing  essential 
to  the  Administration  of  the  Messed  Sacrament ;  that  it  is  the  same  in 
substance  and  true  meaning  with  that  by  which  himself  administers  ;  and 
that  he  would  never  refuse  to  Communicate  where  it  is  used  in  his  own 
Country.  Now,  nothing  of  this  kind  is  to  be  found  in  his  long  performance  ; 
but  in  several  places  he  clearly  enough  avows  the  direct  contrary.  People 
then  must  be  utterly  blind  who  do  not  see  he  is  an  enemy  to  the  Church 
of  England,  and  that  he  persecutes  you  purely  for  being  in  Communion 
with  her. 

What  a  huge  dust  and  tragical  outcry  is  raised  about  the  Independency 
of  your  Church,  which  no  body  questions,  purely  to  raise  the  passions  of 
your  Countrymen,  and  so  convey  the  merits  of  the  cause  quite  out  of  sight ! 
But  I  am  persuaded  men  of  sense  and  sound  judgment  will  not  suffer  them 
selves  to  be  deluded  with  mere  noise,  and  will  expect,  as  they  have  reason, 
that  these  gentlemen  either  make  a  clear  and  open  profession  of  the  suffi 
ciency  and  perfection  of  our  Office,  or  ingenuously  acknowledge  that  they 
believe  the  contrary,  and  are  resolved  to  support  and  propagate  that  Schism 
among  you,  which  we  have  so  just  cause  to  charge  them  with.  If  they  will 
not  be  persuaded  to  do  the  former,  I  must  plainly  tell  them,  that  even  their 
silence  will  be,  and  deservedly,  taken  for  a  confession  of  the  latter. 

As  to  the  Scottish  Office,  I  have  all  along  fully  declared  my  approba 
tion  of  it,  and  these  gentlemen  very  well  know  I  do  not  oppose  the  use  of  it, 
but  only  their  rash  attempts,  who  are  for  perverting  what  was  framed  for 
the  establishing  and  keeping  uniformity  with  the  Church  of  England  into  an 
Instrument  of  Schism,  and  who  artfully  and  insidiously  make  it  the  pretext 
to  thrust  our  Office  out  of  the  Publick  Worship,  which  stands  upon  as  good 
a  foundation  of  authority  as  the  other ;  though  every  body  is  now  convinced 
the  true  reason  for  their  setting  it  aside  is  their  erroneous  belief  of  its  being 
defective  in  Doctrines  essential  to  the  Blessed  Sacrament ;  and  therefore 
altogether  unlawful  to  be  used  in  a  Catholick  Assembly.  There  is  no  one 
then  but  must  discern  the  Scottish  Office  is  no  part  of  the  dispute  ;  but  the 
schismatical  design  of  causing  a  division  both  among  your  own  Members 
and  between  the  two  Churches,  of  which  it  is  by  them  made  the  unhappy 
occasion,  is  the  only  ground  of  this  contest.  And  this  divisive  project  is  the 
more  apparent,  for  that  they  are  not  content  with  the  Office  as  authorised 
by  the  Royal  Martyr's  Proclamation,  but  they  have  depraved  it  with  several 
alterations  squaring  better  with  their  wrong  notions  and  prejudices.  And 
this  it  seems  has  been  done  by  the  authority  of  some  Bishops,  although  the 
said  Proclamation  ordains  that  the  Public  Form  of  Service  thereby  ap 
pointed  shall  be  uniformly  observed  in  the  Worship  of  God ;  and  altho  also 
it  is  agreed  in  the  Concordate  Subscrib'd  by  themselves,  that  they  shall  only 
make  use  of  the  Scottish  or  English  Liturgy,  and  that  they  shall  censure 
any  of  the  Clergy  that  shall  act  otherwise.  Thus,  by  their  supereminent 
authority,  they  have  introduced  a  new  Office  that  can  possibly  lay  no  claim 
to  the  Royal  Sanction ;  and  this  have  they  done  contrary  to  their  own  most 


232  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

solemn  Agreement.  So  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  make  a  knot  strong 
enough  to  bind  these  gentlemen.  Even  their  own  Subscriptions,  and  other 
even  more  sacred  engagements,  cannot  hold  them.  How  then  can  they 
expect  we  can  have  the  least  regard  to  mere  verbal  assurances  or  windy 
declarations,  and  those  too  couched  in  vague,  general,  and  indefinite  expres 
sions  ?  No  ;  they  must  give  us  some  stronger  security  than  this,  or  else  we 
can  have  no  reason  to  be  satisfied. 

As  to  my  lamentable  outcries,  as  he  is  pleased  to  stile  them,  about  the 
Publication  of  S.  James's  Liturgy,  as  it  is  called  (for  after  all,  it  being  so 
much  built  upon  conjecture,  its  genuineness  is  still  very  uncertain),  I  think 
I  have  more  reason  to  make  them  now  than  ever.  For  the  Preface  says,  it 
well  deserves  to  be  universally  received ;  which  has  a  great  resemblance  of 
what  Mr.  Dunbar  says  in  his  Letter.  And  moreover,  at  the  close  of  the 
performance,  there  is  an  Office  to  which  proper  Kubricks  arc  added  for 
direction,  which  is  evidently  calculated  for  present  use.  And  the  Author 
having  shewn  this  to  some  worthy  friends  (probably  Mr.  Keith,  who  was 
particularly  zealous  for  its  Publication,  Mr.  Dunbar,  Mr.  Raitt,  &c.),  he  was 
advised  by  them  to  insert  it  in  the  end  of  the  Book.  No  doubt  this  was  not 
for  nothing.  And  since  these  gentlemen  will  not  fail  to  see  how  much  it  is 
preferable  to  any  of  our  modern  Forms,  it  will  be  difficult  to  make  any  one 
that  knows  them  believe  they  will  not  put  it  in  practice,  notwithstanding 
their  Declaration  to  the  contrary.  They  may  think  of  this  as  they  please, 
but  for  my  part,  so  unhappily  prejudiced  am  I,  as  to  conceive  that  the  two 
Offices  now  already  in  use  among  you,  are  as  compleat  as  it,  with  regard  to 
everything  essential  to  the  Divine  Ordinance,  and  therefore  every  whit  as 
good  and  well  pleasing  to  God.  Nay,  though  I  fear  I  shall  incur  their  high 
displeasure  for  it,  I  will  be  bold  to  say  that  the  English  Office  is,  in  one 
respect,  much  better,  as  being  a  better  instrument  of  peace  in  our  present 
circumstances,  and  a  surer  means  of  composing  the  unhappy  divisions  now 
most  scandalously  rending  the  Church  in  pieces. 

What  I  have  farther  to  say  to  Mr.  Raitt's  Piece,  I  shall  reserve  for  the 
furnishing  out  of  a  full  Answer  to  it,  which  I  hope,  with  God's  assistance,  to 
finish  in  a  little  time.  I  shall  here  only  add  my  most  solemn  Declaration, 
that  there  is  no  body  more  earnestly  desires  to  promote  the  peace  of  the 
Church  than  I  do.  But,  under  the  notion  of  peace,  I  am  not  for  sacrificing 
truth  and  introducing  slavery,  and  giving  up  the  Rights  both  of  the  Church 
and  Crown  to  procure  it. 

I  am  entirely  of  S.  Hierom's  mind,  in  the  following  words  against  John, 
Bishop  of  Hierusalem  : — "  Propheta,  pax,  pax,  et  ubi  est  pax  ?  Nihil  enirn 
grande  est  pacem  voce  prrctendere,  et  opere  destruere ;  aliud  niti,  aliud 
demonstrare  ;  verbis  sonare  concorcliam,  re  exigere  servitutem.  Volumus 
et  nos  pacem,  et  non  solum  volumus,  sed  et  rogamus ;  sed  pacem  Christi, 
pacem  veram,  pacem  sine  inimicitiis,  pacem  in  qua  non  sit  helium  involu- 
tum,  pacem  qua?  non  ut  adversaries  subjiciat,  sed  ut  amicos  jungat.  Quid 
dominationem  pacem  vocamus,  et  non  reddimus  unicuique  rei  vocabulurn 
suum  ?" 

With  my  Prayers  for  you  and  yours,  and  all  the  faithful  Members  of 
your  National  Church,  I  am, 

Reverend  Sir, 
Your  very  affectionate  Brother  and  Servant, 

G.  SMITH. 


EOBEET  KEITH.  233 

Copy,  in  Bishop  White's  Handwriting,  of  proposed  Return  to  Bishop  Smith's 
Proposal  of  enjoiniii'/  the  Eni/lish  Communion  Office  only  in  Scotland.  The 
Diction  seems  to  lie.  Bishop  liattrcnj's. 

E.  E.  and  D.  Br, — Since  yon  refer  it  to  us  to  give  our  sentiments  of  G. 
S.'s  proposal,  directly  to  him  or  by  you,  we  have  chosen  the  latter;  and, 
knowing  your  agreement  with  us  in  this,  desire  you  may  transmit  him  a 
Copy  of  what  follows,  under  your  hand,  as  our  joint  Answer  to  it.  He  has 
himself  mention'd  what  alone  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  our  not  going  in 
with  it,  viz.,  that  if  we  break  through  the  first  Article  of  our  Agreement,  by 
setting  aside  either  of  the  Liturgies,  we  should  raise  such  a  flame  as  could 
not  be  extinguished  so  long  as  other  differences  subsist  among  us.  We  have 
still  Clergymen  of  turbulent  and  ambitious  spirits,  who  would  make  a  handle 
of  this,  and  unite  in  the  cry  that  we  design'd  to  break  through,  not  the  first 
only,  but  all  the  other  Articles  of  that  Agreement ;  and  who,  as  should  serve 
their  views,  would  thence  take  the  liberty  of  shaking  off  all  regard  to  it. 
That  the  Scotish  Liturgy  was  used  before  the  breaking  out  of  our  present 
differences,  and  was  allowed  by  Bishop  Eose  of  Edinburgh ;  that  Bishop 
Fullarton,  his  immediate  Successor,  in  the  Prayer  of  Consecration,  ever 
added  this  Claiise,  which  he  had  written  in  the  margin  of  his  Book — 
"Vouchsafe  to  bless  and  sanctifie  with  thy  Word  and  Holy  Spirit,"  &c. ; 
that  in  the  year  172-4,  when  Liturgical  differences  began  to  make  some 
noise,  the  said  Bishop  Fullarton  convocated  a  Meeting  of  the  Bishops  for 
composing  them,  which  was  done  by  a  Concordate  Subscrib'd  by  all  the 
Bishops,  the  3d  Article  of  which  had  this  Preamble — "  Forasmuch  as  the 
Primus,  and  the  other  Bishops,  his  Colleagues,  have  permitted  the  use  of 
the  Scotish  Liturgy  to  such  of  the  Clergy  as  think  fit  to  use  it,  therefore,"  &c. 
It  was  not  then  the  Scotish  Liturgy  they  sought  to  suppress,  which  indeed 
has  never  been  made  any  ground  of  quarrel ;  for  tho  they  had  had  inclina 
tion  they  had  no  power  to  do  it.  Since  which  time  it  has  been  used  by  the 
greatest  number  of  the  Clergy,  to  the  great  liking  of  the  people.  So  that 
the  disturbers  of  our  peace,  did  we  agree  to  this  proposal,  should  find  ground 
enough  for  an  outcry  against  us. 

If  the  time  come,  and  may  it  soon,  when  the  Church  of  England  shall 
find  reason,  from  better  motives  than  have  appeared  since  the  first  compil 
ing  of  her  excellent  Liturgy,  once  more  to  review  it,  we  may  then  be  encour 
aged  to  follow  so  worthy  an  example,  or  embrace  her  Liturgy  without 
reserve  ;  but  in  our  present  situation,  as  it  would  be  most  unbecoming 
Scotish  Bishops  (who  ought  now  more  than  ever  to  be  jealous  of  their 
Ecclesiastick  independency)  to  set  aside  their  own  Liturgy  in  favour  of  the 
English,  which  is  not  pretended  to  be  any  way  preferable  to  it ;  so  it  would 
raise  a  general  clamour  against  us,  even  by  such  as  have  not  yet  us'd  it, 
and  be  attended  with  conseqiiences  more  fatal  than  all  our  other  differences 
could  produce  ;  and  instead  of  uniting  us  more  closely  to  our  Brethren 
of  England,  would  endanger  that  friendship  which  we  so  much  desire  to 
maintain  with  them.  Our  Church  has  ever  honoured  and  esteemed  that  of 
England,  and  maintain'*!  Communion  with  her  as  a  Sister  Church,  and  the 
use  of  our  own  Liturgy  cannot  be  constructed  a  breach  of  this. 

We  are  sorry  he  should  take  any  exception  at  our  conduct  with  our 
former  Primus.     Tho  the  treatment  he  gave  us  at  our  last  Meeting  was  very 
provoking,  our  proceeding  with  regard  to  him  had  nothing  of  personal 
VOL.  n.  2  G 


EGBERT  KEITH.  235 


District  tf  Drcchiii. 

JAMES  RAITT,  Bishop,  Nov.  22.  Jo.  OGILVY,  Presb.,  Nov.  28. 

JOHN  MAITLAND,  Presb.,  Nov.  28.  AL.  Lux  AX,  Prcsb.,  Nov.  28. 

ROB.  IRVINE,  Deacon,  Nov.  28. 


THOMAS  SIME,  Prcsb.,  Dec.  11.  ALEXR.  CHEYNE,  Presb.,  Dec.  3. 

Ro.  WHITE,  Deacon,  Dec.  11.  JOHX  PETRIE,  Prcsb.,  Dec.  3. 

WIL.  ROBERTSOXE,  Prcsb.,  Nov.  22.  JOHX  LEiTii,  Presb.,  Dec.  3. 

HARIE  EDGAR,  Presb.,  Nov.  23.  JOHN  GROUYS,  Presb.,  Dec.  4. 

DAVID  ROSE,  Presb.,  Nov.  28.  JOHX  STRACHAX,  Deacon,  Dec.  3. 

] District  (if  Dunblane. — X.J>.  Here  some  of  Edinburgh  Sulscrilriix/. 

ROBERT  FORBES,  Presbyter  in  Lcith. 

(Robert  Forbes,  by  commission  from  the  R.  Mr. 

Jas.  Falconar,  Presbyter  in  Air.) 
WILL.  BELL,  Presb. 

DOXALD  ROBERTSOX,  Presbyter  in  Annandalc. 
J.  R.  DOUGLAS,  Presbyter  at  Dunblain. 
Dec.  G.     JOHX  COXACHAR,  Presbyter  at  Drymen. 
Nov.  3.     WIL.  ERSKYXE,  Presbyter  at  Mutliil. 
Nov.  21.  JOHN  BLAIR,  Presbyter  at  Doun. 


JOHX  ALEXANDER,  Bishop  of  Dunk'1. 
WIL.  SETOX,  Dean  and  Presbyter  in  Forfar. 
DAVID  GUTIIRIE,  Presbyter  at  Carsebank. 
WILLIAM  GRAY,  Presbyter  of  Kirriemuire. 
JOHN  RAMSAY,  Presbyter  at  Cortachie. 
FR.  CROMBIE,  Presbyter  at  Alyth. 
JA.  HILL,  Presbyter  at  Blairgowrie. 
GEORGE  INNES,  Presbyter  at  Balgowan. 

Alloa,  Oct.  22,  17-44.  DONALD  ROBERTSON,  Presbyter  at  Ecclefechan,  in 

Annandale,  adheres. 

Jan.  14,  1745.  LAU.  DRUMMOXD,  Pr.  at  Perth. 

GEORGE  ROBERTSOX,  Pr.  in  Strathtay. 
DUN.  CAMERON,  Presbyter  in  Fortingall. 
WILLM.  ABERNETHY,  Deacon  at  Nairn  and  Logic. 

District  »f  Fife. 

ROB.  WHITE,  Ep.  Ffifen.,  Nov.  17.          THO.  YOUNG,  Presb.,  Dec.  12. 
ROB.  LINDSAY,  Presb.,  Dec.  17.  DAVID  GORDON,  Presb.,  Dec.  18. 

DA.  LYNDESAY,  Presb.,  Nov.  17.  ALEX.  LIVINGSTON,  Pr.,  Jan.  14. 

District  of  ItLiD'i'ay. 

WIL.  FALCONAR,  Bishop  of  Murray. 
PATRICK  CHALMERS,  Presbyter  at  Huntly. 
Jo.  IRVINE,  Presbyter  at  Cairmvhelp. 
JA.  WILLOX,  Presbyter  at  Keam. 


236  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

ALEXR.  MITCHEL,  Presbyter  at  Belly. 
GEO.  INNES,  Presbyter  at  Forres. 
FR.  LAY,  Presbyter  at  Inverness. 


Pcterhcad,  August  15,  17-1-i. 

Right  Reverend  Father, — We  being  convcened  here  by  your  Reverence's 
Order,  and  having  considered  the  Copy  of  Bishop  Smith  of  England  his 
Letter,  laid  before  ITS,  we  find  that  he,  without  any  just  ground  or  good  title, 
attacks  the  Legislative  power  of  this  our  independent  Church  of  Scotland, 
and  in  a  manner  seems  to  arrogate  to  himself  a  Right  and  Title  of  compel 
ling  our  Bishops  and  their  Clergy  to  submit  to  his  determinations  :  an 
attempt  so  utterly  inconsistent  with  all  Catholick  Principles,  that  had  we 
not  it  from  such  good  authority,  we  could  never  have  imagined  it  could  have 
been  made  by  any  who  bears  the  Sacred  character  of  a  Bishop.  At  this  his 
conduct  we  are  greatly  surprized,  as  we  utterly  detest  the  Erastian  Prin 
ciples  so  flagrant  in  almost  every  Paragraph  of  his  Letter ;  and  take  this 
opportunity  of  assuring  your  Reverence  that,  as  we  are  in  most  solemn 
manner  bound,  we  shall  still  make  it  our  study  to  pay  all  due  and  Canonical 
Obedience  to  our  lawful  Ordinary,  and  in  our  station  will  endeavour,  to  the 
utmost  of  our  power,  to  support  and  maintain  the  Dignity  and  Privileges  of 
the  Episcopate.  We  heartily  bewail  the  miserable  state  of  this  poor 
divided  Church,  and,  firmly  resolving  never  to  have  any  hand  in  what  we 
apprehend  may  lend  in  the  least  to  the  widening  of  its  present  unhappy 
breaches,  we  earnestly  begg  of  Almighty  God  to  forgive  all  who  have  had 
any  accession  to  them,  and  inspire  all  concerned  with  such  pacific-It  and 
Christian  dispositions  as  may  effectually  put  an  end  to  our  differences,  and 
establish  peace  and  truth  among  us  upon  a  sure  and  solid  foundation.  We 
beg  your  paternal  Benediction  for  Ourselves  and  Flocks,  and  ever  are, 

Right  Reverend  Father, 
Your  most  dutiful  Sons  and  obedient  Servants. 

WIL.  LIVINGSTON,  Prcsb.  WILL.  GUMMING,  Presb. 

Jo.  JAFFRAY,  Presb.  W.  R.  DUNBAR,  Ep. 

WILLIAM  WALKER,  Presb.  AND.  GERARD,  Prcsb. 

ROBERT  KILGOUR,  Presbr.  WIL.  MURRAY,  Prcsb. 

JNO.  SKINNER,  Presb.  GEO.  LAW,  Prcsb. 

ALEXR.  KEITH,  Presb.  WIL.  SMITH,  Prcsb. 

WIL.  BROWN,  Presb.  JAMES  ROSE,  Presb. 

GEORGE  MILNE,  Presb.  JOHN  MORRISON,  Presb. 

ALEX.  MURRAY,  Presb.  GEO.  WALKER,  Presb. 

JOHN  HAMILTON,  Presb.  PATRICK  LUNAN,  Presb. 

ALEX.  MITCHELL,  Presb.  Ro.  MORRICE,  Presb. 

ALEX.  SMITH,  Presb.  PATR.  LAING,  Pbr. 

PUT.  William  Sctoa,  porfar,  to  the  Riylit  lice.  Bishop  Alexander,  Allott. 

R.  R.  Sir, — Yours  of  ye  3d  current  came  to  my  hands  yesterday.  I 
am  surprized  that  ye  Declaration  was  not  arrived  at  your  hands  before  ye 
time  of  your  writting.  It  came  safely  and  in  due  time  to  rne,  and  I  immedi- 
atly  took  it  to  Mr.  Guthry,  who  made  out  ano-r  Copy  yrof;  and  after  we 


liOBEET  KEITH.  237 

hade  Signed  both  Copies,  we  immediatly  sent  ym  to  Mr.  Ramsay,  enclosed 
in  your  Pastoral  Letter,  and  wrapt  up  in  a  line  from  me  to  him  recommend 
ing  dispatch  to  him.  I  was  told  by  Mr.  Gray  that  Mr.  Ramsay  put  the 
Papers  into  his  hands  in  a  day  after,  having  Signed  ym,  and  that  he  in  a  few 
days  sent  them  to  Mr.  Cromby ;  so  that  yc  delay  would  be  altogeyr  unac 
countable,  were  it  not  that  you  desired  they  should  be  Subscribed  by  Messrs. 
Rolton  and  Cameron ;  and  as  y1'  is  no  easy  access  to  ym,  'tis  to  be  presumed 
the  stop  has  been  in  that  quarter  of  your  District.  But  I  hope  they  have 
reached  your  hands  before  this.  The  Declaration  is  a  well-worded  and 
seasonable  Paper,  in  my  judg1 ;  and  tho  it  should  have  no  effect  in  England, 
yet  will  be  of  great  use  to  keep  us  united  amongst  ourselves,  and  fortified 
against  yc  encroachments  of  forreigners  ;  for  tho  Mr.  Lyon,  my  Bro-'r,  now  in 
England,  must  be  supposed  to  know  more  of  yc  Clergy  there  than  any  of  us, 
yet  I  (having  lately  seen  a  Copy  of  a  Letter  from  Bishop  Smith  to  Mr.  Ffife, 
of  Date  Novr.  12,  with  a  Copy  of  ye  Proposals  for  an  accomodation,  made 
by  Bishop  Smith  and  two  of  his  English  Colleagues  to  Bishop  Keith,  in  June 
or  July  last)  despaire  of  those  gentlemen  being  ever  satisfied  with  fair  and 
reasonable  proposals.  It  seems  to  me  it  will  not  be  enough  that  we  own 
ourselves  to  be  of  ye  same  Communion  with  ye  Church  of  England,  unless 
you  suspend  your  Canons,  and  that  nine  die,  and  restore  Mr.  Ffife  to  ye  peace 
of  ye  Church  and  his  Presbyterial  character  (things  to  my  seeming  both 
indecent  and  improbable) ;  and  to  testify  your  being  in  Communion  with 
ym,  administer  ye  B.  Sac-ram1  of  ye  Eucharist  once  a  year  by  yr  Office,  w"h 
Avould  be  attended  with  very  bad  consequences  amongst  ourselves,  and  pull 
down  faster  y"  we  have  been  building  these  twenty  years.  In  his  last  Letter, 
wch  is  an  answer  to  one  from  ye  execrable  Mr.  Ffife  to  him,  he  owns  your  and 
your  Colleagues'  Consecrations  to  be  good,  but  expressly  charges  you  all 
with  Rebellion  and  Schism — Rebellion  in  making  Canons  contrary  to,  or 
rayr  without  the  interposition  of,  the  Civil  power,  and  so  transgressing  yc 
bounds  set  you  before  the  Rev[olutron ;  and  Schism  in  separating  from  ye 
Presbyters  and  people  who  were  for  adhering  to  yc  old  Establishment.  He 
vindicates  and  patronizes  all  who  withdraw  and  separate  from  you  upon 
these  considerations,  and  advises  Mr.  Ffife,  rather  than  apply  to  you  for  it, 
to  admit  his  people  to  the  Altar  without  Confirmation.  Xow,  if  Bishop 
Smith  is  not  singular  in  these  extravagances  (and  it  seems  by  that  Letter, 
Signed  by  him  and  two  of  his  English  Colleagues,  that  he  is  not  singular), 
what  great  hope  can  we  entertain  from  this  Declaration,  unless  it  be  to  unite 
more  closely  amongst  ourselves,  and  let  others  see  that  we  are  to  maintain 
our  Independency,  which  arc  goods  highly  valuable  ?  But  it  will  be  an 
agreeable  disappointment  to  me  to  find  that  it  has  some  good  effect  even  in 
England. 

'\Yc  are  in  no  pain  about  S.  James'  Lyturgie,  being  satisfied  that  we 
shall  have  our  Copies  safely  transmitted  to  us. 

May  Almighty  God  support  our  Sprll  Fathers  under  the  many  dis 
couragements  and  difficulties  with  wdl  you  now  struggle.  May  all  of  us  of 
ye  second  Order  have  the  benefit  of  your  Prayers,  and  in  a  special  manner. 

II.  II.  Sir, 
Your  most  dutiful  Sou  and  obedient  humble  Servt., 

Forfar,  Deer.  16th,  1744.  WIL.  SETON. 

I  wish  you  may  read  this  scribble,  wrote  in  a  hurry  after  the  fatigues 
of  ye  day. 


238  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Nothing  of  consequence  appears  to  have  been  done  without 
Keith's  advice  or  concurrence,  even  before  lie  was  raised  to  the 
Episcopate.  His  Consecration,  however,  took  place  on  the  18th 
of  June,  1727;  the  Sacred  Office  being  performed  at  Edinburgh 
by  Bishops  Miller,  Rattray,  and  Gadderar. 

Xuinber  18  in  J)ixhoj>  Forbes1  Catalogue. 

20.  Original  Deed  of  Bishop  Robert  Keith's  Consecration  by  Bishops 
Millar,  Rath-ay,  and  Gaddcrar,  June  18,  1727.  Bishop  D unbar  Consecrated 
at  yc  same  time. 

From  this  period  the  influence  of  his  wise  and  moderate  policy, 
in  the  business  of  the  Church,  appears  in  several  happy  results  to 
which  he  conducted  the  counsels  of  his  Brethren.  He  was  openly 
and  decidedly  hostile  to  the  foolish  measures  which  wrere  pursued 
by  some  of  his  Colleagues,  who  could  not  all  at  once  throw  off 
the  Erastian  prejudice,  that  the  power  of  a  Religious  Society  is 
not  complete  without  the  co-operation  and  sanction  of  the  Civil 
Magistrate.  He  deprecated  with  much  earnestness  certain  pro 
ceedings  which  took  place  in  consequence  of  this  very  groundless 
opinion  ;  and,  in  reference  to  Ecclesiastical  Patronage  and 
Preferment  at  large,  he  recommended  a  speedy  recurrence  to  the 
maxims  and  practice  of  Primitive  times. 

The  following  Letters  are  copied  from  the  Originals,  which 
were  in  Mr.  Keith's  custody. 

Mr.  Keith'*  Fir*t  Letter  to  ]jinhoj>  FtiUartmi  of  Filinbnr;/Ji. 

My  Lord, — I  am  desired  by  those  persons  of  distinction,  the  honour  of 
whose  acquaintance  you  know  I  have  in  this  place,  to  signify  to  your  Lord 
ship  that  they,  having  seen  and  considered  the  case  of  the  Meeting-house  of 
Dundee,  do  offer  as  their  judgment  that  Bishop  Nome's  Paper,  constituting 
Mr.  Ouchterlony  Minister  thereof,  is  of  a  very  wild  and  extravagant  nature, 
and  a  plain  contradiction  in  itself;  and,  therefore,  that  you  ought  to  comply 
with  the  desire  of  the  good  people  of  Dundee,  and  grant  your  consent  for 
Mr.  Eait  to  remove  from  his  present  small  Charge  to  exercise  his  Ministry 
among  them.  This,  they  assure  your  Lordship,  is  the  only  method  to 
prevent  such  a  breach  and  flame  in  that  City  and  Church  as  you  would  be 
glad  to  have  made  up  and  extinguish'd  when  perhaps  it  may  be  too  late. 

My  Lord,  I  have  not  courage  to  say  to  your  Lordship  all  that  these 
worthy  persons,  in  wliose  name  I  write,  did  order  me  to  say.  I  am  per 
suaded  this  hint  will  be  sufficient,  and  that  your  Lordship  will  be  at  no  loss 
what  to  determine.  Their  concern  in  that  Country,  your  Lordship  knows, 


EGBERT  KEITH.  239 

is  considerable ;  and  that  person  of  them  who  received  lately  a  Letter  from 
you,  recommending  a  gentleman  of  your  name  to  him,  and  which  Letter  I 
saw,  bids  me  in  particular  tell  your  Lordship,  as  he  entertains  a  very  great 
regard  for  your  person  and  the  Church,  would  be  sorry  to  find  you  act  in 
this  affair  otherwise  than  as  he  expects.  I  beg  your  Lordship's  benediction, 
and  am,  My  Lord, 

Your  Lordship's  most  obedient  Son  and  humble  Servant, 
(Wants  a  Date.)  E.  KEITH. 

Mr.  Keith's  Second  Letter  to  l>i*]iop  FnlUirton  of  Edinburgh. 

My  Lord, — The  Episcopal  Congregation  at  Dundee  having,  upon  some 
whispering  little  advantageous  to  your  Lordship,  sent  a  representation  of 
the  same  to  several  persons  of  distinction  of  that  Country  who  reside  in  this 
City,  they  do  again  commissionate  me— first,  to  return  you  thanks  in 
their  name  for  the  favourable  and  just  Decree  you  were  pleased  to  make 
with  respect  to  Mr.  Eait ;  and  next,  they  beg  your  Lordship  to  adhere  to  the 
same  judgment  against  the  insinuations  of  some  people  who  want  only  to 
tarnish  your  Lordship's  character,  and  then  to  make  a  mock  of  you  when 
they  get  it  done. 

My  Lord,  it  consists  with  my  knowledge  that  this  is  not  a  new  thing, 
and  since  the  request  of  the  people  of  Dundee,  and  of  those  persons  here,  is 
entirely  conformable  to  justice,  and  tends  only  to  peace  and  concord,  which 
it  is  visible  the  contrary  party  doth  not, — I  beg  pardon,  as  one  of  your 
Presbyters,  to  offer  my  advice  to  your  Lordship  to  confirm  your  former  Deed, 
if  ever  any  solicitation  shall  be  made  in  the  contrary;  or,  which  will  be 
equally  available,  that  you  act  nothing  in  contradiction  to  what  you  have 
already  done.  I  ask  your  Lordship's  Benediction,  and  am,  my  Lord, 
Your  Lordship's  most  obedient  Son  and  humble  Servant, 

Aprile  5th,  1727.  E.  KEITH. 


Eev.  Sir, — I  am  let  into  a  story  of  the  Eight  Eev.  Mr.  Norrie,  in  which 
I  take  notice  of  some  steps  out  of  the  ordinary  road.  I  cannot  but  take 
notice  of  one  of  an  extraordinary  nature,  which  is  his  constituting  and 
ordaining  Mr.  Ouchterlony  his  Successor  by  his  own  authority,  and  a  pre 
tended  majority  of  the  house  on  his  side,  which  is  an  act  of  an  extraordinary 
nature,  if  not  a  contradiction  in  itself;  for  which  I  cannot  approve  it,  but 
rather  that  Mr.  Eait  should  have  that  post  of  Dundee,  which  will  be  a  mean 
to  extinguish  that  flame  which  is  but  too  much  kindled  there  already,  and 
is  of  a  more  canonical  healing  nature.  Please  signify  my  mind  in  this 
matter  to  those  worthy  persons  of  distinction  by  whose  advice  you  wrote  to 
me.*  This  is  all  from  Your  affectionate  Brother, 

(Sic  Subscr.)  Jo.  EDIXBURGEX. 

To  the  Eev.  Mr.  Robert  Keith, 

Minister  of  the  Gospel  at  Edr. 

:':  So  this  is  an  Answer  to  Mr.  Keith's  First  Letter. 


Eev.  Sir, — I  find  that  there  are  still  some  things  upon  the  wheel  relat 
ing  to  Mr.  Eait's  settlement  at  Dundee,  and  some  endeavours  makin"-  to 


240  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

perswade  me  to  alter  my  mind  in  what  I  have  clone.  I  hereby  declare  that 
I  firmly  adhere  to  my  opinion,  and  that  no  insinuation  whatsoever  shall  be 
able  to  make  me  revoke  what  I  have  already  declared  in  that  affair.  So  I 
desire  you  to  signify  so  much  to  the  Reverend  Clergy  and  Gentlemen  there, 
so  as  there  be  not  the  least  suspicion  given  for  altering  my  mind  in  that 
business  ;  which  I  give  as  my  full  and  final  determination  in  the  settlement 
of  that  Congregation  on  the  forcsaid  Mr.  Rait.  This,  with  my  Benediction 
to  you  and  all  the  Reverend  Brethren  there,*  I  rest,  Revd.  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  Brother  and  humble  Servant, 
(Irccnhall,  Aprile  9th,  1727.  (Sic  Subscr.)         Jo.  FULLARTOX. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  Robert  Keith, 

Minister  of  the  Gospel  at  Ed1'. 

:;:  This  in  Answer  to  Mr.  Keith's  Second  Letter  to  the  Bishop. 


Rev.  Sir, — Last  day  the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh's  Letter  to  you  was 
deliver' cl  me  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  James  Rait ;  he  received  it  from  Mr.  Carnegy, 
the  gentleman  of  whom  I  wrote  you  in  my  last.  The  said  Letter  was  open 
when  it  came  to  his  hands,  and  lie  knows  not  but  it  may  chance  to  be  of  use 
to  him,  and  therefore  entreats  carefully  to  preserve  it.:;:  The  Bishop  has 
likewise  wrote  a  Letter  to  Mr.  Rait,  authorising  him  to  leave  his  Charge  at 
Kirrimuir,  and  accept  of  that  in  this  place  ;  and  another  to  us  of  the  Epis 
copal  Congregation,  approving  of  and  confirming  our  Election.  Mr.  Rait, 
after  a  formal  invitation  to  residence  among  us,  came  in  this  week,  in  order 
to  begin  and  perform  his  Ministry  on  Sunday  next ;  since  which  time  he 
produced  to  Mr.  Goldman  his  authority,  and  earnestly  desired  he  might 
unite  with  him  as  his  Colleague  ;  who  answered  that  he  could  give  him  no 
return  untill  he  consulted  Mr.  Ouehterlony,  with  whom  we  humbly  think 
that  neither  Mr.  Rait  nor  we  ourselves  have  any  concern.  lie  has  not 
yet  got  Mr.  Goldman's  Answer,  else  should  by  this  time  have  advised  you  of 
it.  "Meanwhile,  we  have  provided  a  house  where  Mr.  Rait  may  perform 
Divine  Service  to  a  good  number  of  people,  and  have  the  promise  of  our 
Magistrates  that  he  shall  have  the  same  liberty  which  the  other  two  enjoy, 
altho  Mr.  Ouchterlony's  friends  have  been  at  much  pains  to  give  them  very 
bad  impressions  of  his  ministry  and  principles.  This  will  be  delivered  you 
by  my  Son,  together  with  the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh's  Letter  to  you,  men- 
ti'on'd  above.  Wishing  you  all  happiness,  I  am  with  profound  respect. 

Rev.  Sir, 
Your  most  affectionate  and  humble  Servant, 

Dundee,  18th  March,  1727.  CIIA.  WHITE. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  at  his  Lodging 
in  the  Canongatc,  Edinburgh. 

*  This  is  the  Letter  of  March  3rd. 


Rev.  Sir,— I  was  favour'd  with  yours  of  the  23d  currant.  This  will  be 
delivered  you  by  Mr.  Dempster,  a  young  gentleman,  and  who  is  a  nephew 
of  Mr.  James  Rait.  You  will  find  enclosed  a  Letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Edin 
burgh,  which,  after  perusal,  seal  up  and  return  to  the  said  Mr.  Dempster. 


ROBERT  KEITH.  241 

You  are  earnestly  entreated  by  the  gentlemen  who  Subscribe  that  Letter, 
that  you  would  take  the  trouble  of  seconding  it  with  one  to  the  Bishop  from 
yourself,  which  Mr.  Dempster  will  likewise  take  from  you  :  for  the  substance 
of  it  we  refer  you  to  your  own.  This  second  application  to  the  Bishop  is 
occasional  by  some  thrcatuings  of  Mr.  J.  0:iy,  which  have  reached  our  ears. 
His  expression  is,  that  unless  Mr.  Rait  renounce  Episcopacy  he  will  bo 
obliged  in  a  very  short  time  to  remove  from  this  place ;  which  plainly 
insinuates  that  he  must  have  a  design  in  view  of  imposing  upon  the  good 
Bishop,  by  putting  this  affair  in  some  other  shape  than  that  in  which  we 
most  ingenuously  and  faithfully  represented  it  to  his  Lordship.  "We  are 
informed  that  next  week  he  goes  for  Edr,  where  no  doubt  his  utmost  efforts 
will  be  used  to  effectuate  this  his  unchristian  design.  I  told  you  in  my  last 
that  Mr.  Rait,  after  presenting  to  Mr.  Goldman  the  credentials  of  his  Title, 
and  earnestly  desiring  he  might  unite  with  him  as  his  Collcgue,  that  he  put 
him  off  with  promise  of  a  reply  how  soon  he  had  consulted  with  Mr.  Ouch- 
terlony  ;  but  instead  of  this  (finding  their  first  stratagem  fail  with  respect  to 
his  ministrations),  they  began  to  muster  up  all  their  objections  against  the 
Bishop  of  Edinburgh's  authority,  by  which  he  is  settled,  representing  Mr. 
Rait  a  disorderly  intruder,  and  as  such  threatning  all  who  should  counten 
ance  or  join  with  him  in  any  of  the  publick  Offices  of  Divine  Service,  nor  to 
suffer  them  to  enter  their  meeting.  However  surprising  this  their  bold 
unprecedented  stroke  at  all  Ecclesiastical  Discipline  and  Christian  Unity 
may  appear  to  you,  it  is  fact ;  for  no  sooner  did  they  perceive  the  people  of 
their  Communion  incline  to  maintain  unity,  by  going  one  dyet  to  Mr.  Rait's 
Meeting  and  another  to  theirs  for  the  benefit  of  publick  Worship,  twice  every 
Lord's  day — which  they  did  not  before,  their  Meeting-house  not  being 
sufficient  to  contain  one-half  of  the  Episcopal  Congregation — they  fell  upon 
this  unheard  of  and  most  unchristian  stratagem  of  frightning  the  people 
with  the  guilt  of  Schism  ;  tho  I  perswade  myself  this  will  have  a  greater 
tendency  to  ruin  than  promote  their  interest.  I  need  not  give  you  direc 
tions  what  cautious  use  to  make  of  this  information.  Praying  Clod  may 
reward  all  your  good  offices  to  us,  and  me  in  particular,  with  a  Blessing  on 
yourself  and  family,  I  am,  with  sincere  respect, 

Rev.  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  humble  Servant, 
Dundee,  March  30,  1727.  CIIA.  WHITE. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  Minister  of  the  Gospel, 
at  his  Lodgings  in  the  Canongate. 

[In  consequence  of  this  request,  Mr.  Keith  wrote  his  Second  Letter  to 
the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh ;  and  the  Bishop's  Letter  of  Aprile  9th  was  in 
answer  to  it.] 


Rev.  Sir, — I  received  your  favours  of  the  14th  currant,  which  gave  no 
small  satisfaction  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Rait's  friends  in  and  about  this  place, 
having  thereby  removed  all  those  fears  they  laboured  under  from  the  open 
threatnings  and  secret  contrivances  of  their  adversaries.  I  assure  you  these 
gentlemen  have  a  very  just  and  gratcfull  sense  of  this  and  all  your  former 
good  offices,  and  do  heartily  wish  it  may  be  in  their  power  at  any  time  to 
make  a  due  resentment  of  them.  Meanwhile  such  is  the  unhappy  temper 
of  the  chief  promoters  of  all  the  clamours  that  have  been  raised  against  Mr. 
VOL.  n.  2  H 


242  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Halt's  settlement,  that  they  not  only  give  a  deaf  ear  themselves  to  all  terms 
of  peace,  but  disswade  others  ;  and  althu  there  is  not  the  least  room  to  douht 
of  yours  being  a  true  and  genuine  Copy  of  the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh's  Letter, 
yet  the  experience  we  have  of  their  unfair  and  disingenuous  dealing  with 
those  whom  they  have  hitherto  strangely  hoodwink'd,  gives  us  reason  to 
think  that,  tho  conscious  to  themselves  of  the  sincerity  of  your  Letter,  yet 
they  will  not  scruple  to  make  their  people  believe  that  it  may  be  otherwise. 
Wherefore,  to  prevent  this,  the  Original  is  earnestly  desired,  which  you  may 
either  give  to  Mr.  Dempster,  who  delivcr'd  you  my  last,  or  to  my  son,  cither 
of  which  will  send  it  under  their  cover  ;  tho  I  much  rather  it  came  under 
your  own,  by  which  you  may  perhaps  be  able  to  give  some  account  of  Mr. 
Ouchtcrlony's  negociations,  who  is  now  at  Edinburgh,  and,  as  some  say, 
designs  further  West.  Praying  all  happiness  to  you,  I  am,  with  much 
respect,  Rev.  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  most  humble  Servant, 
Dundee,  Aprile  18,  1727.  CIIA.  WHITE. 

p.S. — Since  writing  of  this,  I  have  a  Letter  from  my  brother,  who  is 
returned  from  executing  a  Commission  he  had  in  the  West  Country,  which 
I  hope  will  in  a  very  little  time  not  only  compose  our  own  differences,  but 
likewise  contribute  to  the  peace  and  welfare  of  the  whole  Church.  I  shall 
be  able  to  write  you  in  a  short  time  more  freely  on  that  subject. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Robert  Keith, 

at  his  Lodgings  in  the  Canougate,  Ed1'. 


Rev.  Sir, — I  received  your  favourable  Letter  of  the  12th,  a  Copy  of 
which  I  have  this  day  sent  to  my  brother  to  be  communicate  to  Dr.  Rattray, 
who,  I  am  informed,  is  at  present  in  the  North.  This  may  perhaps  retard 
his  congratulatory  Letter  to  your  Bishop*  some  longer  than  if  he  had  been 
in  this  neighbourhood.  Meanwhile,  I  am  persuaded  that  my  brother  will 
communicate  your  Letter  to  him  without  loss  of  time.  Mr.  Robert  Ouch- 
terlony  and  Mr.  Rose,  his  Clerk,  left  this  place  on  Thursday  last  in  their 
way  home,  having  carried  Dr.  Rattray's  Election  by  a  great  majority  of  the 
Presbyters  of  this  District  ;  and  I  believe  both  he  and  the  Elect  Bishop  of 
Murray  may  be  with  you  in  a  very  short  time  to  be  Consecrate,  if  the  Bishop 
of  Edr  be  disposed  to  go  into  such  measures  as  you  and  other  friends 
shall  propose  to  him.  Mr.  Rait  and  his  friends  here  have,  from  your  con 
stant  and  repeated  favours,  conceived  a  very  just  and  lively  sense  of  your 
pious  concern  for  the  peace  and  welfare  of  the  Church ;  and  are  no  less 
sensible  of  your  prudent  conduct  in  keeping  our  Letters,  for  we  now  plainly 
see  our  error  in  that  Paragraph  of  ours,  wherein  we  say  that  we  never  yet 
question'd  Mr.  Ouchtcrlony's  settlement,  which  may  indeed  be  constructed 
as  if  we  acknowledged  the  legality  of  it.  Pray  God  may  prosper  your  pious 
and  assiduous  endeavours  for  peace  and  order  to  His  afilicted  Church,  and 
reward  your  unwearied  labours  that  way  with  all  the  blessings  of  this  and 
another  life.  I  remain,  with  sincere  and  due  respect, 

Rev.  Sir, 
Your  much  obliged  and  most  humble  Servant, 

Dundee,  13th  May,  1727.  CHA.  WHITE. 

*  This  was  Bishop  Millar,  for  Bishop  Fullarton  Died  in  the  end  of  Aprile. 


BOBEBT  KEITH.  213 

p.y. — Mr  Bait  being  busied  this  afternoon,  earnestly  desired  I  should 
tender  you  his  service,  and  begs  you'll  excuse  his  not  writing  till  next  Post. 

[But  as  far  as  Mr.  Keith  remembers,  he  received  no  Letter  in  all  this 
affair  from  Mr.  Bait,  nor  is  he  in  possession  of  any.] 

To  the  Bevercnd  Mr.  Bobert  Keith, 

at  his  Lodgings  in  the  Canongate,  Ed1'. 

When  the  Revolution  had  broken  the  English  Church  into 
two  Communions,  many  of  the  ejected  Clergy,  and,  among  the 
rest,  the  celebrated  Dr.  Hickes,  thinking  themselves  no  longer 
tied  down  by  Parliamentary  Decrees  in  their  Sacerdotal  Adminis 
trations,  wished  to  revive  those  Ancient  Usages,  which  they  saw 
the  English  Reformation  had  begun  with  in  the  Eucharistic 
Service,  of — 1st,  Mixing  Water  with  the  Wine  ;  2d,  Commemo 
rating  the  Faithful  departed ;  3d,  Consecrating  the  Elements  by 
an  express  Invocation ;  and  4thly,  Using  the  Oblatory  Prayer 
before  reception,  as  in  the  Scotch  Episcopal  Communion  Office. 
Others  of  them  were  for  adhering  to  the  Office  as  it  stood  estab 
lished  by  Law,  and  authorized  by  long  Practice,  which  the 
intended  Revival,  they  said,  seemed  to  condemn.  This  differ 
ence  of  sentiment  produced  Conferences  and  Writings  from  both 
sides  without  any  effect,  but  with  no  heat  on  either  side  as  long 
as  Bishop  Hickes  lived,  whom,  for  his  piety  and  judgment,  they 
all  equally  revered.  But  upon  his  Death,  on  the  15th  December, 
171-5,  Bishop  Jeremy  Collier,  the  laborious  Church  Historian, 
being  now-  the  Senior  Bishop  in  that  Succession,  and  a  man  of 
much  warmth  of  temper  as  well  as  extent  of  learning,  appeared 
keenly  at  the  head  of  the  "  USAGERS  ;"  and,  being  supported  by 
an  able  party,  among  whom  was  .the  well-known  Dr.  Thomas 
Brett,  pressed  the  reception  of  the  "  Four  Primitive  Points"  with 
great  vigour  and  strength  of  argument.  At  the  head  of  the 
other  party  was  Bishop  Nathaniel  Spinckes,  formerly  one  of  the 
Prebendaries  of  Sarum,  and  Rector  of  S.  Martin's,  in  that 
Diocese,  who,  with  his  Followers,  chiefly  rested  their  opposition 
on  the  necessity  of  keeping  close  to  the  Second  Book,  which 
had  received  both  a  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  Sanction.  For 
terminating,  if  possible,  these  differences,  it  was  agreed,  on  both 
sides,  to  consult  the  Scottish  Bishops,  and  refer  the  matter  wholly 
to  their  decision.  To  this  purpose  a  Mr.  Peck — [See  Scotichroni- 


244  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

con,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  118  and  127 1 — came  down  from  the  "  USAGERS" 
in  1718,  and  made  application,  both  to  Bishop  Hose  and  Bishop 
John  Falconar,  for  a  Synodical  Determination ;  which  they  de 
clined,  but  were  willing  to  act  as  Mediators  and  Friends  to  both 
sides,  recommending  peace  and  forbearance  of  authority.  Bishop 
Spinckcs,  too,  from  the  other  side,  wrote  to  these  two  Bishops, 
to  engage  them  in  his  favour,  but  met  with  the  same  return  ;  yet, 
to  testily  their  readiness  to  do  what  they  could  for  preventing  a 
rupture  among  friends,  they  employed  Dr.  Rattray  (of  Craighall, 
in  Perthshire),  a  man  of  singular  knowledge  in  Ecclesiastical 
Literature,  to  draw  up  "Proposals  of  Accommodation  for  recon 
ciling  these  Differences ; "  which,  at  their  request,  he  did  with 
candour  and  moderation,  without  entering  critically,  as  he  well 
could,  into  the  merits  of  the  Cause,  but  only  wishing  both  parties 
to  condescend  so  far,  for  peace's  sake,  as  to  Communicate  occa 
sionally  with  one  another  in  Holy  Offices,  according  to  the 
respective  Form  of  those  whose  privilege  it  was  to  Officiate  at 
the  time.  This  Paper,  though  approved  by  Bishop  Rose,  as 
"  being  written  with  much  judgment,  full  of  Christian  temper, 
and  making  much  for  peace,"  yet,  as  the  Bishop  feared,  had  the 
common  fate  of  all  such  reconciling  schemes,  not  to  give  the 
satisfaction  intended  by  it,  at  the  same  time  that  neither  party 
could  find  fault  with  it. 

The  spirit  which  prevailed  in  the  Church  for  nearly  twenty 
years  after  the  date  of  the  above  Transactions,  and  particularly 
after  the  Demise  of  the  good  Bishop  Rose,  proves  but  too  clearly 
that  the  Scottish  Prelates,  wrho  were  originally  engaged  in  the 
question  as  Mediators  and  Umpires,  soon  became  deeply  inter 
ested  as  Parties,  and  eagerly  employed  themselves  in  its  discus 
sion  as  individual  Controversialists.  Picmonstrances,  Injunctions, 
and  Pastoral  Admonitions  (the  usual  resources  of  Churchmen 
when  the  more  ordinary  methods  of  convincing  the  understand 
ing  are  found  ineffectual),  were  issued  as  well  by  the  "  Usagers" 
as  by  those  who  opposed  the  Revival  of  those  Ceremonies.  The 
moderation  employed  by  Bishop  Keith,  in  paving  the  way  for  a 
final  Agreement  among  the  leading  men  on  both  sides,  is  to  be 
extolled. 


EGBERT  KEITH.  245 

Xionbcr  21  in  Jjishop  Ivories'  Catalogue. 

13.  In  Print  (8vo),  a  Letter,  Septemr.  23,  1728,  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  David 
Ranken,  upon  the  "  Usages,"  by  Bishop  Keith. 

The  accommodation  of  these  unfortunate  differences  seems 
indeed  to  have  given  much  satisfaction,  even  to  those  persons 
who  were  known  to  have  made  the  greatest  sacrifices  in  point  of 
opinion  and  predilection.  In  a  Letter  from  Bishop  Rattray  to 
Bishop  Keith,  the  former  quotes  an  expression  as  used  by  Bishop 
Gillan,  who  trusted  that  "it  would  not,  through  God's  grace,  be 
in  the  power  of  men  or  of  devils  to  disturb  that  happy  Union 
with  which  he  has  been  pleased  to  bless  us." 

As  soon  as  Bishop  Keith  was  invested  with  the  Episcopal 
Office,  18th  June,  1727,  as  Coadjutor  to  the  then  aged  Bishop 
Millar,  he  was  intrusted  with  the  Superintendence  of  the  exten 
sive  Districts  of  Caithness,  Orkney,  and  the  Isles.  As  he  con 
tinued  to  reside  in  Edinburgh,  we  are  not  informed  in  what  way 
he  discharged  the  duties  incident  to  these  remote  Districts,  so 
difficult  at  that  time  of  access. 

Among  the  numerous  Papers  preserved  in  the  Episcopal 
Chest  of  Drawers  at  Trinity  College,  Glenalmond,  there  are  two 
Original  Deeds  certifying  the  Ordination  both  to  the  Diaconate 
(1740,  Oct.  21)  and  Priesthood  (1751,  Jan.  9)  of  Mr.  James 
Winchester,  by  Bishop  Keith  for  Orkney,  "juxta  morcm  ccdcsue 
Scoticance," 

Tacked  to  these  Deeds  there  is  an  original  Letter  from  some 
gentlemen  in  Stornoway,  a  part  of  the  Long  Isle,  Dated  July  22, 
in  the  year  1738,  and  addressed  to  Bishop  Keith,  in  which  they 
"thank  him  most  kindly  for  his  care  of  them,  in  sending  among 
them  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Williamson  of  Sky,"  cv.c.  There  is  also  a 
second  Original  Letter  in  the  same  Repository,  from  Mr.  James 
Taylor  at  Tlmrso,  12th  July,  1757,  addressed  to  Mr.  Robert 
Forbes  of  Leith,  afterwards  Bishop  Forbes,  expressing  "his 
surprise  how  any  could  call  in  question  Bishop  Keith  being 
acknowledged  Bishop  of  Caithness  and  Orkney." 

Number  15  in  Jlivhop  Forbes1  Catalnr/nc. 
21.  (Holographs)  Letters  from  Messrs.  James  Taylor  and  William  Long- 


246  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

moor,  Thurso  aud  "Wick,  Janry.  1-1,  1731,  to  Bishop  Keith,  tlint  they  had  a 
Letter  from  Mr.  Seymours,  travelling  Tutor,  at  the  desire  of  Bishop  Frce- 
baim,  to  forward  a  Deed  of  Flection  in  favour  of  Mr.  AVm.  Harper,  Senior, 
to  he  Bishop  of  Caithness,  &c. ;  to  which  Bishop  Keith  made  return,  that 
"  since  this  project  was  carried  on  without  his  knowledge,  thu  Bishop  of 
Caithness,  he  strictly  prohibited  them  to  meddle  in  that  matter  ;  which  put 
a  stop  to  it.  Bishop  Keith  told  Mr.  Seymours  that  he  was  not  ignorant  of 
the  uncanonical  step  he  had  been  adviseing,  &c.  Mr.  Symmers  owned  it 
Avas  Avrong,  and  begg'd  there  might  be  110  more  of  it,"  &c. 

25.  Some  Original  Letters  between  Bishop  Keith  and  Mr.  David  Ander 
son,  about  supplying  Orkney  Avith  Clergymen,  and  about  the  Bishops  not 
admitting  some  persons  into  their  number,  &c.,  Feb.  5,  &c.,  1735. 

Bishop  Keith  was  Preferred  to  the  Superintendence  of  Fife, 
17th  July,  1733. 

liistntmeut  <>f  Election  of  the  11.  11.  Bixhop  Unlert  Keith  fur  the  District  of  F fife. 

"We,  the  Presbyters  of  the  District  of  Ffife,  being  sensible  of  the  loss  we 
sustain  by  the  want  of  a  Bishop,  to  be  a  principle  of  unity  unto  us,  and 
having  met  by  virtue  of  a  Mandate  directed  by  the  Right  Reverend  Mr. 
David  Ffreebairn,  the  Primus,  and  the  other  Right  Reverend  Bishops,  to  the 
Reverend  Mr.  "William  Mylne,  at  Ffalkland,  have  unanimously  Fleeted  the 
Right  Reverend  Bishop  Robert  Keith  to  be  our  immediate  Ordinary,  to 
preside  over  us,  and  to  have  the  inspection  over  the  Church  of  God  among 
us.  And  AVG  hereby  promise  him  all  due  and  Canonical  Obedience,  and  we 


of  this  Church,  for  their  Confirmation.  In  testimony  Avliereof,  AVC  have 
Subscribed  these  Presents,  Avrittcn  by  Master  James  Morice,  our  Clerk,  at 
Ffalklaud,  the  tenth  day  of  July,  One  Thousand  Seven  Hundred  and  Thirty 
Three. 

"WiLL.  MYLNE,  Moderator.  JOHN  ALEXANDER. 

J.  MACKENZIE.  Ro.  LYON. 

JA.  MORICE,  In.  Clerk.  ALEX.  LIVINGSTON. 

JOHN  PETRIE.  DAVID  GORDON. 

Reverend  Brethren, — I  thank  you  kindly  for  the  confidence  you  have 
placed  in  me,  and  shall  endeavour,  by  the  help  of  God,  to  discharge  the 
duty  of  my  Sacred  function  among  you. 

ROBERT  KEITH. 

Right  Reverend  Brother,— "We  heartily  approve  the  choice  the  Presby 
ters  of  the  District  of  Ffife  have  made  of  you,  and  do  hereby  Confirm  you 
Bishop  of  that  District ;  and  we  pray  God  may  direct  and  assist  you  in  the 
management  thereof. — Given  at  Edinburgh  the  17  July,  1733. 

DAVID  FFREEBAIRN,  Primus. 
Jo.  GILLAN,  Bishop. 


EGBERT  KEITH.  247 

The  following  are  remarkable  incidents  during  his  Episcopate 
of  Fife  :- 

5.  of  Number  17.  Originals  and  Copies  of  Letters  concerning  the 
Ordination  of  Mr.  Nathaniel  Spens  by  Bishop  Freebairn,  tho  living,  and 
about  to  Officiate  in  Fife,  the  District  of  Bishop  Keith,  particularly  the  said 
Mr.  Spens'  Holograph  Letter  of  humble  submission  and  acknowledgment  to 
Bishop  Keith,  Aprile  18,  1738,  upon  which  he  was  instantly  pardon'd  and 
received  into  favour,  &c. 

Bishop  Keith  issued  the  following  Protest  against  this  irregularity  :— 

I,  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  Bishop  of  the  District  of  Fife,  understanding  that 
several  of  the  Presbyters  of  Edinburgh  are  now  employed,  by  Order  of  the 
Bishop  of  that  District,  in  taking  tryal  of  Mr.  Nathaniel  Spens,  belonging 
to  my  Jurisdiction,  do  hereby  protest  against  the  uncanonical  practice,  and 
against  you,  Mr.  Thomas  Auchinleck,  Mr.  Thomas  Mowbray,  Mr.  William 
Harper,  Mr.  Alex.  Robertson,  Mr.  Alex.  Mackenzie,  Mr.  Patrick,  and  David 
Rait,  and  all  others,  as  if  named,  that  shall  employ  themselves  as  aforesaid, 
or  that  recommend  the  said  Mr.  Nathaniel  Spens  to  the  Bishop  of  Edin 
burgh,  or  any  other  Bishop,  for  receiving  of  Holy  Orders  without  my 
consent ;  and  I  do  likewise  hereby  appeal  to  the  Bishops  of  this  Church  in  their 
first  Meeting  for  redress,  if  you  shall  presume  to  proceed  any  farther,  this  my 
Protestation  notwithstanding.  In  Witness  whereof,  I  have  Written  and 
Signed  this  Instrument  of  Protest  and  Appeal  at  Edinburgh,  the  Third  Day 
of  February,  1738,  and  have  appointed  the  same  to  be  given  in  in  my  name  to 
the  persons  concerned,  by  Mr.  John  Mackenzie,  my  Colleague,  one  of  the 
Presbyters  of  Edinburgh,  who  is  likewise  to  do  all  other  things  required 
herein. 

(Sic  subscr.)  ROBERT  KEITH. 

18.  of  Number  14.  (Original)  Gentlemen  in  and  about  Falkland  to 
Bishop  Keith,  Augt.  20,  1739,  about  providing  them  in  a  Clergyman. 

10.  of  Number  14.  Do.  to  Do.,  Octor.  24,  1739,  requesting  to  have  Mr. 
Young,  Chaplain  to  Logic  Drummond,  settled  at  Falkland. 

21.  of  Number  14.  (Holograph)  Scotstarvet  to  Bishop  Keith  (Febry.  3, 
1741),  that  ye  People  of  Grail  had  made  choice  of  Mr.  Robt.  Lindsay  for  their 
Pastor,  and  requested  his  being  settled  accordingly. 

30.  of  Number  14.  (Original)  Octor.  8,  1744.'  Address  to  Bishop  Keith 
from  the  Gentlemen  at  the  Congregation  of  Down,  to  have  Mr.  John  Blair 
to  be  their  Pastor,  with  Mr.  Blair's  original  Letter  of  Acceptance  of  same 
Date. 

Keith  Resigned  the  Superintendence  of  Fife  on  the  23d  of 
August,  1743. 

15  of  Number  7.  (Original)  Bishop  Keith's  Resignation  of  Fife,  with 
concurrences  of  the  oyr  Bishops,  Edr,  Augt.  23,  1743. 

It  was  in  1743  that  the  Diocese  of  Edinburgh  became 
vacant  by  the  Death  of  Bishop  Rattray,  who  appears  to  have 


248  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

been  Elected  in  1743  by  the  Clergy  of  that  City:   though  (as 

**Jv  «/     *  O  \ 

Bishop  Russell  says)  there  is  no  satisfactory  evidence  to  show 
that  he  ever  entered  upon  the  Episcopal  Duties  of  the  Metropolis. 
Upon  this  event,  some  intention  seems  to  have  been  entertained 
of  appointing  Bishop  Keith  his  Successor ;  and  the  .Resignation 
of  Fife  by  the  latter,  which  took  place  in  the  same  year,  docs 
unquestionably  give  a  certain  degree  of  countenance  to  the 
rumour  which  was  propagated  on  this  subject. 


P.  B.  I).  B., — After  wishing  you  all  the  compliments  of  the  season,  and. 
that  this  year  may  ho  more  favourable  to  all  of  us  than  the  last  has  been,  I 
must  tell  you  that  I  greatly  fear  our  friend  A.  G.  thought  it  not  amiss  to 
drop  something  of  what  we  intended  as  to  the  filling  the  Vacancy  of  Dun 
blane  ;  but  I'll  remonstrate  most  warmly  against  it,  and  I  apprehend  it  will 
cost  both  you  and  me  all  our  skill  to  enducc  him. 

I  could  be  content  to  know  what  the  Clergy  of  Edinbr  arc  a  doing,  and 
if  they  have  any  person  in  view  for  their  Bishop.  I  wish  they  were  so  wise 
as  to  elect  our  \l.  II.  Primus,  Bishop  Keith.  I  take  him  to  be  the  propcrest 
person  for  the  Diocese  of  Fdinr  upon  many  accounts.  His  knowledge, 
prudence,  experience,  and  his  situation  do  all  point  him  out  for  that  office  ; 
and  I  have  often  wondred  why  the  Presbyters  did  not  pitch  upon  him  for 
their  Ordinary.  For  my  own  part,  after  I  have  once  and  again  conversed 
with  his  keenest  opponents,  I  never  could  have  one  good  reason  for  their 
being  so  averse  to  a  person  of  Bishop  Keith's  merit  and  capacity,  unless 
merit,  capacity,  and  modesty  be  good  reasons.  It  is  very  true  none  of  them 
come  near  him  in  all  these  respects,  for  I  know  he  is  very  much  superior  to 
any  Priest  in  the  Diocese,  for  his  erudition,  penetration,  and  for  a  great 
many  other  qualities  ;  and  we  know  whom  envy  attends.  But  I  dare 
promise,  chuse  whom  they  will,  they  cannot  make  a  better  choice.  And, 
therefore,  should  it  happen  to  come  to  be  talkt  of,  in  any  conversation  where 
you  may  be  a  sharer,  what  my  sentiments  arc  with  respect  to  the  Diocese  of 
Fdinr  (as  you  and  I  know  one  another's  thoughts  upon  that  head,  as  well  as 
on  some  others),  I  beg  you'll  do  me  the  favour  (I  leave  the  opportunities  to 
your  own  prudence)  to  answer  in  my  name  that  I  still  look  upon  Bishop 
Keith,  upon  many  accounts,  to  be  the  fittest  and  propcrest  person  for  being 
Bishop  of  Edinr ;  and  wherever  I  have  anything  to  say  he  shall  have  my 
suffrage  for  it.  I  hope,  if  any  settlement  casts  up,  you  will  remember  my 
brother,  whom  I  can  recommend  for  his  prudence  and  good  behaviour. 

11 — t  has  maul'd  me  most  unmercifully  for  intreating  him  to  dispense 
with  the  intimation  of  his  sentence  at  Inverness,  where  Dr.  Colvin  has  a 
br.  and  two  sisters,  and  upon  that  account  Mr.  Hay  is  very  much  afraid  to 
venture  it.  YVill  not  W.  and  you,  who  are  the  majority  in  this  case,  dis 
pense  with  the  order;  for  I  might  have  applied  to  W.  and  you  instead  of 
writing  to  Pi.,  who  is  intirely  under  the  dominion  of  his  own  and  some  other 
people's  passions ;  and  from  his  appearing  so  inflexible  on  a  point  of  so 


ROBERT  KEITH.  249 

small  import,  and  to  which  I  am  bound  by  no  terms  of  Catholick  Com 
munion — tho  he  boldly  avers  I  am,  to  which  I  only  am  obliged  by  Signing 
the  Order  for  its  intimation — yet  he  is  resolved  to  keep  me  bound,  as  if, 
forsooth,  it  was  solely  in  his  power  so  to  do.  I  do  really  think  the  poor 
gentleman's  head  is  giddy.  He  makes  such  a  world  of  clatter  about  his 
authority,  his  absolute  independent  powers,  etc.,  that  he  puts  me  in  mind  of 
some  of  the  old  Popes,  when  they  actually  frighted  folks  by  their  clamour 
and  noise  to  yield  to  their  demands.  He  does  not  consider  the  times  in 
which  he  lives  ;  he  makes  110  allowances  for  other  people's  circumstances  or 
prejudices  ;  but  rushes  on  blindly,  passionatly,  and  with  not  one  grain  weight 
of  prudence,  neither  minding  his  own  character,  nor  how  far  his  indiscreet 
behaviour  may  affect  the  Church.  I  shall  let  him  know  so  much,  whither 
he  likes  it  or  not,  some  posts  hence. 

Fail  not  to  write  me  what  is  a  doing,  and  how  the  Clergy  of  Dumblane 
stand  affected ;  what  news  from  England,  and  if  R —  or  W.  Robertson  are 
to  enter  the  lists  with  that  doughty  champion  of  novelty,  Ja.  Dundass.  I 
beg  your  prayers,  as  you  shall  always  have  those,  tho  unworthy,  of, 

R.  R.  Sir, 
Your  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Servant, 

Elgin,  Janry.  11,  17-1-1.  ^YIL.  FALCONAR. 

Bishop  Keith  used  considerable  pains  to  remove  the  impression 
which  the  above  report  created  among  his  Brethren.  In  a  Letter 
to  Mr.  Thomas  Auchinleck,  October  Gth,  1744,  he  makes  a 
formal  Declaration  that  he  never,  in  any  shape,  solicited  to  be 
Bishop  of  Edinburgh,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  had  declined 
the  Appointment  when  actually  offered  to  him.  The  "  Nolo 
Episcopari"  has,  no  doubt,  been  long  regarded  as  an  innocent 
expression  of  pious  insincerity, — a  phrase  which  is  never  meant 
to  be  interpreted  too  literally,  or  remembered  too  long.  Still,  in 
circumstances  such  as  those  which  belong  to  the  "Episcopal 
Church"  in  these  Northern  parts,  we  cannot  imagine  that  a 
man  of  Bishop  Keith's  character  could  be  exposed  to  disappoint 
ment  by  having  his  services  rejected  ;  and  far  less  can  we  believe 
that  he  would  violate  truth,  even  to  heal  the  wounds  of  mortified 
ambition. 


NARRATIVE    OF    WHAT    PRECEDED   THE    SYNODICAL    MEETING   OF   THE    BISHOPS   OF   THE 
CHURCH    OF    SCOTLAND,    BEGUN    ON    TUESDAY    THE     llTH    JULY,    1738. 

(Fi'O)ii  a  sitKtU  4.to  JUS.  in  B'aslif>j~i  Jolly's  Kixt.\ 

Upon  Monday  or  Tuesday  after  Pentecost,  Bishops  Rattray  and  Keith 

went  together  to  visit  Bishop  Freebairn,  who,  after  some  discourse  with 

them,  expressed  his  desire  that  Bishop  Rattray  might  become  the  happy 

instrument  of  removing  any  misunderstandings  that  had  happened  amongst 

VOL.  u.  2  i 


250  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

the  Bishops  ;  who  declared  himself  ready  and  willing  to  use  his  best  en 
deavours  towards  that  good  end ;  and  the  next  time  he  waited  of  Bishop 
Freehairn,  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  a  Syiiodicall  Meeting  of  the  Bishops 
was  the  most  proper  mean  for  removing  all  misunderstandings  whatsoever. 
Bishop  Freebairn  was  then  entirely  of  the  same  mind,  and  desired  Bishop 
Rattray  to  write  Bishop  Dunbar,  that  his  mind  might  be  also  known  with 
regard  to  that  General  Meeting,  which  he  accordingly  did.  Eight  or  ten 
days  after  writing  to  Bishop  Dunbar,  Bishops  Rattray  and  Keith  again 
waited  of  Bishop  Freebairn,  and  all  were  of  opinion  that  it  was  not  neces 
sary  to  wait  Bishop  Dunbar's  answer,  there  being  no  room  to  doubt  but  he 
would  heartily  approve  of  the  calling  of  the  Synod;  and  therefore  Bishop 
Freebairn,  as  Primus,  did  appoint  a  Synod  to  be  holden  at  Edinburgh,  and 
tin}  Form  in  which  Bishop  Dunbar  was  called  to  that  Synod  is  as  follows  : — 
"  Edinr,  June  5th,  17o8. — Since  a  Meeting  of  the  Bishops  of  this  Church  is 
1  bought  requisite,  I  hereby  appoint  the  Meeting  to  be  on  the  Eleventh  day 
of  July  next  at  Edinburgh  ;  and  therefore  I  earnestly  intreat  you  to  be 
present  thereat,  as  Bishop  Batttray  and  Bishop  Keith  will  be,  who  are  here 
with  me  at  writing  of  this.  Signed,  DAVID,  Bishop  of  Edinburgh,  Primus. 
Directed  thus — To  the  Bight  Reverend  William  Dunbar,  Bishop  of  the  Dis 
trict  of  Aberdeen." 

Just  as  the  Primus  was  going  to  Sign  this,  he  said  to  this  purpose,  "I 
hope,  Brethren,  you  do  not  desire  that  Bishop  White  should  be  called  to 
this  Meeting."  To  which  it  was  answered  by  Bishop  Rattray,  "  That  there 
would  be  time  enough  to  talk  of  that  matter  'twixt  and  the  day  appointed." 

Soon  after  the  Meeting  was  thus  appointed,  Bishop  Rattray  received 
from.  Bishop  Dunbar  an  Answer  to  that  Letter  he  had  wrote  him  at  the 
desire  of  the  Primus,  Dated  at  Peterhead,  June  the  1st,  1738,  in  which  he 
says, — "  If  I  find  the  return  of  any  tolerable  measure  of  strength  and  vigour 
of  body,  which  I  have  little  reason  to  look  for  in  my  advanced  age,  I  shall 
not,  God  willing,  fail  to  be  personally  present  with  you  on  the  day  appointed 
for  your  Meeting.  But  meantime,  I  earnestly  intreat  that  the  Primus  will 
agree  to  what  I  think  I  have  a  just  title — that  I  may  be  present  then  by 
Proxy.  The  consideration  of  my  great  age  and  infirmity  s,  and  the  great  dis 
tance,  will,  I  am  confident,  incline  both  him  and  our  other  Right  Reverend 
Brethren  to  see  the  reasonableness  of  this  demand,  which,  notwithstanding 
my  right,  I  will  take  as  a  favour  and  good  omen.  If  a  fit  occasion  offer 
here  for  transporting  me  by  sea,  I  know  not  but  my  great  desire  to  see  you 
all  united  in  the  bond  of  peace,  will  give  me  courage  to  embrace  it." 

Bishop  Rattray  immediately  shewed  Bishop  Dunbar's  Letter  to  the 
Primus,  and  said  that  nothing  was  demanded  by  that  Bishop  but  what  he 
had  unquestionable  right  to  ;  and  the  Primus  very  readily  acknowledged  the 
reasonableness  of  the  thing,  and  declared  he  would  willingly  receive  a  Proxy, 
and  wished  that  Bishop  Dunbar  would  make  choice  of  Bishop  Rattray  to  be 
the  person.  And  in  an  after  communing  between  these  two  Bishops,  in 
which  Bishop  Rattray  acquainted  Bishop  Freebairn  with  every  thing  that 
then  occurred  to  him  which  he  thought  should  be  done  in  the  Meeting,  and 
particularly  concerning  Bishop  White,  Bishop  Freebairn  said  that  lie  him 
self  had  been  much  blamed  by  some  persons  for  having  appointed  a  Meeting, 
which,  however,  he  was  resolved  to  keep.  To  which  Bishop  Rattray 
answered  to  this  purpose — "  That  it  would  seem  such  as  did  so  wanted  to 
raise  and  keep  up  faction  among  the  Bishops,  to  the  weakening  of  that  Dis 
cipline,  which  would  be  the  necessary  consequence  of  their  unanimity." 


ROBERT  KEITH.  251 

Bishop  Free  bairn  likewise  told  Bishop  Rattray  that  Bishop  Oucliterlony  had 
written  to  him  that  he  had  little  or  no  thoughts  of  attending  this  Meeting. 

Upon  the  10th  of  July,  Bishops  Rattray  aiid  Keith  went  to  Bishop 
Freebairn  about  mid-day,  and  desired  to  know  from  him  the  time  and  place 
of  the  Synod's  Meeting  on  the  eleventh,  which  he  appointed  to  be  precisely 
at  eleven  of  the  clock  forenoon,  within  his  own  Meeting  House  ;  and  added 
that  he  had  already  given  the  proper  orders  for  having  the  door  open  against 
that  hour.  These  two  Bishops  enquired  also  whether  Bishop  Freebairn  had 
heard  lately  from  Bishop  Oucliterlony,  and  if  he  knew  anything  of  his 
coming  to  Town  at  this  time  '?  To  which  Bishop  Frccbairu  replyed  that  ho 
knew  not,  for  that  he  had  not  had  another  Letter  from  him. 

On  that  same  10th  of  July,  Bishop  Rat  tray  received  a  Letter  from 
Bishop  Freebairn,  Dated  at  ten  o'clock  at  night,  as  Bishop  Keith  also 
received  one  that  same  night,  about  eleven  of  the  clock,  both  of  them  in  the 
following  words,  viz. : — 

Right  Reverend,— Since  you  were  here,  Bishop  Oucliterlony  is  come 
to  Town  [he  arrived  at  4  afternoon] ,  and  is  positive  that  he  will  neither 
keep  time  nor  place  appointed,  till  there  be  a  previous  Conference  amongst 
us  ;  and  if  you  please  to  come  to  this  house  about  ten  o'clock,  you  will  be 
waited  upon  by  him  and  your  affectionate  Brother  and  Servant, 

(Signed)  DAVID  FREEBAIRN. 

To  which  Bishop  Rattray  returned  this  Answer  next  morning  :— 
Right  Reverend, — I  received  a  Letter  from  you,  Dated  yesterday  at  ten 
o'clock  at  night,  wherein  you  inform  me  that  Bishop  Oucliterlony  is  come 
to  Town  ;  but  what  you  add  does  not  a  little  surprise  me,  that  he,  a  single 
Bishop,  should  pretend  to  refuse  to  keep  the  time  and  place  of  a  Synodical 
Meeting  appointed  by  you,  as  Primus,  and  agreed  to  by  all  the  other 
Bishops  ;  or  that  he  should  require  a  previous  Conference  amongst  the 
Bishops  at  ten  o'clock  this  day,  who  are  to  meet  within  an  hour  after  (at 
eleven),  in  order  to  confer  together,  and  determine  whatever  Ecclesiastical 
matters  shall  come  before  them.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  so  very  odd  and 
unaccountable  a  Proposal,  that  I  hope  when  you  reflect  upon  it,  you  will 
excuse  my  not  complying  Avith  it.  But  I  shall  not  fail,  Clod  willing,  to 
attend  you  at  the  time  and  place  you  have  appointed  for  our  Meeting.  I 
am,  &c. 

And  Bishop  Keith's  Answer  was  this:— 

R.  R.  S., — I  received  a  Letter  from  you  yesternight,  telling  me  that 
Bishop  Oucliterlony  was  positive  he  would  neither  keep  time  or  place  of  our 
Synodical  Meeting,  unless  he  had  a  previous  Conference  this  day  at  ten 
o'clock  (just  an  hour  before  that  appointed  by  you  for  that  Meeting).  As  I 
had  an  appointment  at  the  same  hour  this  morning,  and  that  I  can  see  no  use 
for  such  a  Conference  so  shortly  before  the  Synodical  Meeting,  in  which  we 
may  freely  treat  of  any  thing  in  a  friendly  manner,  I  desire  to  be  excused 
from  waiting  on  you  sooner,  and  am,  R.  R.  S., 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  Servant, 

Edinr,  July  llth.  ROBERT  KEITH. 

On  the  llth  of  July,  a  little  before  the  hour  of  Meeting,  while  Bishops 
Rattray  and  Keith  were  on  the  street,  ready  to  enter  Bishop  Freebairn's 
Meeting  House,  as  they  expected,  the  Reverend  Mr.  Alexander  Robertson 
came  to  them  with  a  Message  from  him,  that  he  was  under  a  distress,  which 


•25-2  DISTRICT  01'  FIFE. 

laid  hung  about  liim  all  tlic  day  before,  and  therefore  earnestly  desired  they 
would  come  to  his  own  Dwelling  House.  These  Bishops  answered  Mr. 
Robertson — They  would  consider  of  what  he  had  proposed  to  them,  and 
make  a  Return  to  Bishop  Freebairn  ;  and  immediately  they  went  into  a 
house,  and  wrote  the  following  Letter,  viz.  : — 

Pi.  R.  S., — We  have  just  now  received  your  Message  by  Mr.  Robertson, 
to  which  AVC  agree,  provided  you  send  us  a  Letter  appointing  the  Synodical 
Meeting  to  be  at  your  Dwelling  House,  within  half  an  hour  after  this  Date  ; 
and  likewise  provided  the  Synod  have  the  command  of  the  door  of  your 
House,  and  an  empty  room  next  to  that  wherein  the  Meeting  is  to  be,  so  as 
that  we  may  not  be  overheard ;  but  otherwise  we  cannot  meet  in  any  place 
where  the  Synod  has  not  all  due  freedom.  "We  expect  your  Answer  by  the 
bearer,  and  arc,  R.  R.  S., 

Your  affectionate  Brethren  and  humble  Servants, 

T.  RATTKAY.          ROBERT  KEITH. 

Edinburgh,  July  llth.  ',  after  eleven  forenoon. 

To  which  they  received  this  Answer,  viz.  : — 

l\ight  Reverend  Brethren, — I  thank  you  for  your  Charity  towards  me, 
when  I  am  not  much  in  a  condition  to  come  abroad.  You  shall  have  all 
the  freedom  in  Meeting,  and  shall  command  a  room  where  none  shall  hear 
us.  I  am,  R.  R., 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  Servant, 

DAVID  FREEBAIKN. 
Edinburgh,  llth  July,  half  an  hour  after  eleven  forenoon. 

Presently  after  which,  the  Bishops  Rattray  and  Keith,  together  with 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Robert  Lyon,  Presbyter  at  Craill,  Proxy  for  Bishop  Dunbar, 
repaired  to  Bishop  Freebairn's  house,  where  they  Avcre  met  by  him  and 
Bishop  Ouchtcrlony;  and  after  ordinary  salutations  past,  Bishop  Rattray 
presented  Mr.  Lyon  as  Bishop  Dunbar's  Proxy,  and  then  desired  Bishop 
Freebairn,  as  Primus,  to  constitute  the  Synodical  Meeting.  But  Bishop 
Ouchterlony  proposed  that  there  should  be  a  previous  Conference  amongst 
the  Bishops,  and  was  answered,  "  that  all  Synodical  Meetings  being  designed 
for  conferring,  consulting,  and  determining,  concerning  the  affairs  of  the 
Church,  and  the  Dyet  of  the  Synod  being  now  come,  and  all  the  Bishops 
convened  in  it,  it  was  certainly  most  proper  to  constitute  the  same  by  Prayer 
to  God.  as  the  likeliest  means  to  procure  His  blessing  upon  it,  and  then  to 
enter  upon  that  which  was  the  proper  business  thereof."  But  Bishop 
Ouchterlony  endeavoured  to  enforce  his  proposal  by  alledging  the  precedent 
of  what  was  done  in  December,  1731,  for  putting  an  end  to  the  division 
then  subsisting  among  the  Bishops  of  this  Church.  To  which  it  was  replyed, 
that  in  December,  1731,  there  was  no  Synodical  Meeting  of  Bishops.  [As 
indeed  there  neither  was  nor  could  then  be  any  Synodical  Meeting,  in  regard 
the  division  was  then  so  high  that  not  only  were  there  opposite  claimants  to 
the  Bishoprick  of  Brechin,  but  also  to  the  District  of  Edinburgh  itself,  and 
consequently,  as  things  then  stood,  to  the  very  power  or  right  of  convocating 
such  a  Meeting.  And  accordingly,  what  was  done  in  1731  was  only  in  the 
way  of  amicable  Conference,  begun  at  first  by  two  Bishops,  viz.,  Gillau  and 
Keith,  each  of  different  sides ;  and  altho  five  Bishops  came  to  be  present 
aftenvards  in  these  Conferences,  and  in  some  of  them  a  sixth,  yet  as  there 
were  then  ten  Bishops  in  the  Kingdom,  so  what  was  concluded  and  agreed 


EOBEET  KEITH.  253 

on  in  these  Conferences  was  never  considered  to  have  received  its  sanction 
until  it  was  also  Signed  by  the  other  four  Bishops,  who  were  then  at  their 
respective  dwelling  places.] 

Then  Bishop  Oucliterlony  objected  the  precedent  of  the  Meeting  in  the 
month  of  June  1733.  To  which  Bishop  Keith  made  answer,  that  Bishop 
Lumsden,  on  whose  account  that  Meeting  was  called,  having  sickened,  and 
being  on  his  deathbed  the  very  time  the  Synod  should  have  mett,  the 
Bishops  continued  in  Town  till  after  his  Burial,  without  any  business,  and 
so  were  often  in  conversation  together  ;  but  that  no  general  Conference 
concerning  things  to  be  done  in  the  Synod  was  either  required  or  holden  by 
them.  [And  Bishop  Oucliterlony  may  remember  that  one  very  important 
point  was  never  communicated  to  Bishops  Eattray  and  Keith  by  the  other 
Bishops  (tho  those  other  had  it  some  years  before  in  their  mind),  uutill  it 
was  proposed  in  full  Synod  the  very  last  hour  of  its  sitting.  But  to  what 
purpose  was  all  this  insisting  on  a  previous  Conference  ?  Had  the  Bishops 
happened  to  differ  in  their  sentiments  at  such  a  Conference,  would  that  have 
voided  the  Meeting  ?  The  Court  of  Home  laboured  by  all  its  most  refined 
politicks  to  drive  off  time  both  before  and  after  the  Council  of  Trent  was 
begun,  by  proposing  of  Conferences,  &c. ;  yet  the  Pope  never  ventured  to  recal 
the  Council  which  himself  had  appointed,  nor  to  abstract  his  presence  from 
it :  this  Avas  a  pitch  too  high  for  that  great  man.] 

Bishop  Frecbairn  then  declared  that  it  was  his  own  opinion  that  the 
Meeting  should  be  constitute,  adding  that  for  his  own  part  he  thought  any 
thing  might  be  talked  of  as  well  after  as  before  it  was  constitute. 

But  Bishop  Oucliterlony  next  objected  against  admitting  Bishop  Dun- 
bar's  Proxy,  as  being  a  thing  altogether  without  precedent  in  the  Church. 
To  which  it  was  answered  that  the  precedents  were  numerous  both  in 
General  and  Provincial  Councils  in  the  ancient  Church.  Then  he  insisted 
there  was  at  least  no  precedent  in  the  Church  of  Scotland.  In  answer  to 
which,  he  was  told  that  if  there  was  no  precedent  for  it,  there  was  none 
against  it :  and,  therefore,  whatever  Eights  belong  to  the  Bishops  of  the 
Catholick  Church,  must  necessarily  belong  to  every  Bishop  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  unless  he  could  show  something  in  the  Canons  or  Constitution  of 
that  Church  to  preclude  them  from  the  same.  [But  tho  it  did  not  occur  at 
that  time,  and  that  the  answer  then  given  is  fully  sufficient,  yet  (notwith 
standing  the  very  few  Eecords  that  are  extant)  there  is  at  least  one  most 
clear  and  evident  Document  of  this  Eight  being  enjoyed  by  the  Scottish 
Bishops,  as  well  as  by  the  Bishops  in  other  parts  of  the  Catholick  Church. 
This  Document  is  preserved  in  that  Council  recorded  in  the  Chartularics 
both  of  Aberdeen  and  Murray,  lying  in  the  Lawyers'  Library  at  Edinburgh, 
and  lately  Published  by  Dr.  Wilkins— vol.  1st.,  page  607-608— and  is,  for 
what  is  yet  known,  the  only  Scottish  Council  whereof  there  is  any  tolerable 
Account  remaining;  and  the  first  Canon  of  it  concludes  thus — "Si  quis 
vero  eorum  canonica  pra-peditione  fuerit  impeditus,  Procuratorem  vice  sua 
sufficientem  substituat.  Non  autem  veniens  personaliter,  cum  venire  possit, 
et  noluerit,  auctoritate  Concilij  et  arbitrio  puniatur."  In  English  thus— 
"But  if  any  of  them  (Bishops)  shall  be  detained  from  coming  to  the 
Council  through  any  Canonical  impediment,  let  him  constitute  a  sufficient 
Proxy  in  his  place.  And  he  that  does  not  come  in  person  when  he  may 
come,  but  will  not,  let  him  undergo  an  arbitrary  punishment  by  the 
authority  of  the  Council."  And  with  what  face  can  the  Proxy  of  a  Bishop 
be  objected  against,  when  even  the  Presbyters  of  Edinburgh  have  been 


254  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

allowed  to  vote  by  Proxy  in  their  Meetings.]  Bishop  Freebairu  then 
declared  again  that  it  was  his  opinion  the  Meeting  should  be  constituted. 

And  while  Bishop  Ouchtcrlony  was  still  contending  for  a  previous  Con 
ference,  even  now  that  the  hour  of  the  Synod  was  come,  and  labouring  thus 
to  protract  the  time  by  a  repetition  of  the  same  reasons,  and  opposing  the 
judgment  of  all  the  other  Bishops,  Bishop  Freebairn.  the  Primus,  was 
pleased  a  third  time  to  express  himself  in  these  words — "Brethren,  what  I 
said  first,  I  say  last,  it  is  my  opinion  that  whatever  could  be  said  before, 
may  be  as  well  said  after  constituting  the  Meeting."  Bishops  Rattray  and 
Keith  then  urged  him  to  proceed  according  to  his  OAVH  judgment  and  theirs 
also,  to  constitute  the  Meeting  by  Prayer  to  God,  for  His  direction  and 
blessing  upon  their  Deliberations  and  Conferences,  as  the  most  likely  means 
to  bring  them  to  a  good  issue ;  and  even  required  him  to  do  it  according  to 
his  proper  Office.  There  being  for  it  the  voices  of  them  two,  added  to  his 
own  judgment  (the  Proxy  all  that  time  saying  nothing),  against  the  single 
judgment  of  Bishop  Ouchterlony. 

But  then  Bishop  Ouchterlony  desired  Bishop  Freebairn  to  take  notice 
that,  if  the  Meeting  were  once  constituted,  there  would  be  three  votes  against 
two,  a  very  evident  majority  (said  he) ;  for  he  could  count  his  five  fingers — 
three  of  which  were  more  than  two.  [Would  the  majority  have  been  less 
evident  had  Bishop  Dunbar  been  there  in  person  ?] 

Bishops  Rattray  and  Keith  then  observing  it  to  be  half  an  hour  after 
twelve  o'clock,  proposed  to  leave  the  other  two  Bishops,  offering  to  return 
at  live  afternoon,  with  this  express  provision,  that  immediately  upon  their 
coming  back,  the  Meeting  should  be  constitute.  Bishop  Ouchterlony  said  in 
express  words,  "  That  is  a  friendly  proposal ;"  and  so  they  took  leave. 

At  live  afternoon,  they  went  again  to  Bishop  Freebairn's  house,  and, 
after  much  civility,  chairs  were  sett,  and  he  desired  the  other  Bishops  would 
sitt  down.  But  it  was  answered  that  there  was  no  occasion  for  sitting  down 
till  the  Meeting  was  once  constitiited  by  Prayer,  which  they  desired  he  would 
do  immediately. 

Then  Bishop  Freebairn  himself  proposed  what  Bishop  Ouchterlony  had 
insisted  on  in  the  forenoon,  viz.,  that  the  Bishops  should  previously  talk 
together  ;  and  altho  Bishops  Rattray  and  Keith  urged  him  to  proceed  and 
constitute  the  Meeting,  he  continued  talking  for  a  pretty  large  space.  And 
when  he  had  done,  Bishop  Rattray  again  desired  him  to  constitute  the 
Meeting,  to  which  he  being  averse,  and  showing  a  very  different  countenance 
and  humour  than  in  the  forenoon — alledging  now  that  the  Proxy  should  be 
sett  aside,  and  pretending  to  have  several  other  things  yielded  to  him,  which 
belonged  properly  to  the  cognizance  of  the  Synod,  before  he  would  proceed 
to  constitute  it — Bishops  Rattray,  Keith,  and  the  Proxy  came  away,  after 
they  had  professed  their  sorrow  that  he  should  have  so  peremptorily  refused 
to  constitiite  that  Meeting,  which  he  himself  had  called,  and  had  all  along 
declared  he  would  keep,  till  that  very  moment. 

MINUTES 

Of  tJie  S>/)indic«l  Meetim/  hold  en  within  the  lleetinr/  House  in  Barrenger's  Close, 
TtiMlriu,  lllh  July,  1738. 

The  Bishops  Rattray  and  Keith,  and  Mr.  Lyon,  as  Proxy  for  Bishop 
Dunbar,  after  they  had  gone  both  forenoon  and  afternoon  to  Bishop  Free- 
bairn's  Dwelling  House,  at  his  own  desire,  did,  upon  his  refusal  to  constitute 


EGBERT  KEITH.  255 

the  Synodical  Meeting  appointed  by  him  to  be  held  on  this  day,  come  to  the 
Meeting  House  in  Barrenger's  Close  (lest  any  Protest  should  be  taken  from 
the  day  to  which  the  Meeting  was  called  being  elapsed),  where  the  Reverend 
Mr.  Lyon  produced  a  Proxy  from  Bishop  Dunbar,  which  was  read,  and  is  as 
follows,  viz.: — "To  the  Rev.  Mr.  Robert  Lyon,  Presbyter  at  Craill.  I, 
William  Dunbar,  Bishop  of  the  District  of  Aberdeen — forasmuch  as  a 
Synodical  Meeting  of  the  Bishops  of  this  Church  is  appointed  to  be  holden 
at  Edinburgh,  upon  Tuesday  the  eleventh  day  of  July  next,  and  that  my 
weakness  of  body  renders  me  unable  to  be  present  at  it  in  person,  as  I  would 
most  heartily  wish  to  be — do  therefore,  in  conformity  with  Ecclesiastical 
practice  on  the  like  occasions  in  former  Ages,  hereby  constitute  and  appoint 
you,  the  Reverend  Mr.  Robert  Lyou,  Presbyter  at  Craill,  my  Proxy  in  this 
ensuing  Synodical  Meeting,  giving  full  power  and  authority  to  you,  as 
representing  me,  to  sit  and  vote  in  my  name,  as  if  I  myself  were  personally 
present. — Given  at  Peterhead,  the  17th  day  of  June,  1738  years,  by  WILT'. 
DUXBAR,  Epis.  Abd." 

Then,  as  being  the  majority  of  the  Bishops,  they  resolved  to  constitute 
themselves  into  a  Synodical  Meeting,  according  to  the  Call  and  Appointment 
of  the  Primus  to  be  on  this  day,  which  was  accordingly  done  by  Bishop 
Rattray,  the  Senior  Bishop. 

After  Prayer,  the  Bishops  proceeded  to  choose  a  Clerk,  and  Mr.  Lyon 
produced  an  Instruction  from  Bishop  Dunbar  to  give  his  vote  for  Bishop 
Keith  (who  was  unanimously  chosen  Clerk),  and  that  Instruction  is  as 
follows: — "Forasmuch  as  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  first  step  after 
constituting  a  Meeting  will  be  to  make  choice  of  a  Clerk,  for  to  mark  down 
in  writing  _  every  thing  that  shall  pass  therein;  and  since  my  Right  Rev. 
Brother,  Bishop  Keith,  has  formerly  performed  that  office,  it  is  my  sentiment 
that  he  be  continued  Clerk  at  this  time  likewise  ;  and,  therefore,  I  desire 
you,  as  my  Proxy,  to  give  vote  in  my  name  accordingly." 

Then  Bishop  White  came,  and  claimed  his  right  to  sit  and  vote  in  this 
Synodical  Meeting,  as  being  the  first  that  had  been  holden  since  his  Conse 
cration.  The  other  Bishops  present  did  acknowledge  his  right,  but  desired 
him  not  to  insist  upon  it  untill  they  should  see  if  the  other  two  Bishops 
would  come,  and  concur  in  the  Meeting;  to  which  he  (Bishop  White) 
condescended. 

Next  after  this,  written  Invitations  were  sent  to  the  Bishops  Freebairn 
and  Ouchterlony,  to  come  and  take  their  place  presently  in  the  Synod,  and 
the  messenger  returned  and  told  he  had  delivered  them.  The  Invitations 
are  as  follows  :— "  To  the  Right  Reverend  David  Freebairn,  Bishop  of  the 
District  of  Edinr. — Whereas  a  Synodical  Meeting  of  the  Bishops  of  this 
Church  was  appointed  by  you,  and  agreed  to  by  the  other  Bishops,  to  be 
holden  at  Ediur,  this  llth  day  of  July,  1738  years ;  and  the  Bishops  being 
convened  att  your  Dwelling  House,  upon  your  own  request,  and  requiring 
you  again  and  again  to  constitute  the  said  Meeting  by  Prayer,  and  that  both 
in  the  forenoon  and  in  the  afternoon,  you,  notwithstanding,  still  refused  so 
to  do  :  we,  therefore,  the  majority  of  the  Bishops,  finding  ourselves  oblidged 
to  keep  the  said  Meeting,  have  accordingly  met  within  the  Meeting  House  in 
Barrenger's  Close;  and,  the  Meeting  'being  constitute  by  Dr.  Thomas 
Rattray,  Senior  Bishop,  do  hereby  invite  and  require  you,  David  Freebairn, 
Bishop  of  the  District  of  Edinr,  to  come  and  take  your  place  presently  in 
this  Synodical  Meeting,  which  you  yourself,  as  Prinms,  had  called.  (Signed) 
T.  RATTHAY,  ROBERT  KEITH,  Ro.  LYON,  Proxy  for  Bishop  William  Dunbar." 


25G  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

•-  To  the  Eight  Rev.  John  Ouchterlony,  Bishop  of  the  District  of  Brechin. — 
Whereas  a  Synodical  Meeting  of  the  Bishops  of  this  Church  was  appointed 
by  David  Freebairn,  Bishop  of  the  District  of  Edin1',  as  Primus,  to  be  holden 
at  Edinr  this  llth  July,  1738,  and  the  Bishops  being  convened  two  different 
times  this  day,  within  the  Dwelling  House  of  the  said  Primus,  upon  his 
desire,  and  requiring  him  at  both  times  to  constitute  the  said  Meeting, 
which  he  constantly  refused  to  do,  and  3*011  concurred  in  disswading  him 
from  it :  we,  therefore,  the  majority  of  the  Bishops,  finding  ourselves 
oblidged  to  keep  the  said  Meeting,  have  accordingly  met  within  the  Meeting 
House  in  Barreuger's  Close,  and  the  Meeting  being  constitute  by  Dr. 
Thomas  Rattray,  Senior  Bishop,  do  hereby  require  you,  John  Ouchterlony, 
Bishop  of  the  District  of  Brechin  (as  we  have  likewise  done  the  Primus)  to 
come  and  take  your  place  presently  in  this  S3~nodical  Meeting.  Signed  as 
above."  Then  the  Bishops  adjourned  to  the  next  day  at  twelve  o'clock. 

W'i'tliu'xiltti/,  12///  Jill '/,  at  Xo/ni. 

The  Bishops  being  met,  and  Prayers  said,  Mr.  Lyon  was  sent  to 
Bishops  Freebairn  and  Ouchterlony,  to  give  them  a  second  Invitation  to 
come  and  take  their  place  in  the  Synod.  They  both  acknowledged  they 
had  received  the  written  Invitations  the  night  before;  but  said  they  had 
resolved  neither  to  give  any  written  Answer  nor  to  be  present  in  the 
Meeting. 

After  Mr.  Lyon  had  reported  this  Answer,  he  then  produced  an  Instruc 
tion  from  Bishop  Dunbar  relating  to  Bishop  "White,  which  is  as  follows : — 
"  Whereas  the  Reverend  Mr.  Robert  White,  in  consequence  of  an  unanimous 
Address  by  the  Presbyters  of  the  District  of  Dunblane,  referring  the  Election 
to  the  Bishops  of  this  Church,  was,  by  the  majority  of  them,  chosen  Bishop 
of  the  said  District,  and  that  upon  the  application  of  the  said  Majority  of 
the  Bishops  to  the  Primus,  he,  instead  of  concurring  with  them  in  the  Con 
secration  of  the  said  Elect,  as  he  ought  to  have  done,  did,  together  with 
Bishop  Ouchteiiony,  protest  against  the  same,  without  offering  any  Canoni 
cal  reasons  or  exceptions  in  the  contrary  ;  and  that  these  two  Bishops  have 
never  as  yet  acknowledged  the  said  Bishop  White  for  Bishop  of  the  said 
District  of  Dunblane  :  therefore,  if  any  scruple  shall  be  made  at  this  time 
against  his  sitting  and  voting  in  this  Meeting  of  Bishops,  I  hereby  require 
you,  as  my  Proxy,  to  give  suffrage  in  my  name  for  his  being  admitted 
thereto,  as'  having  been  Canonically  Consecrated  and  appointed  Bishop  of 
the  before-mentioned  District,  and  having  thereby  equall  right  with  any 
other  Bishop  of  this  Church,  to  this  and  all  other  Ecclesiastical  Privileges 
competent  to  them  as  Bishops  thereof." 

And  Bishop  White  was  unanimously  received,  and  took  his  place  in  the 
Synod. 

Then  the  Meeting  adjourned  to  four  afternoon. 

12//;  Juli/,  nt  Four  Afternoon. 

The  Bishops  being  met,  and  Prayers  said,  a  Proposal  was  made  by  Mr. 
Lyon,  in  name  of  Bishop  Dunbar,  for  which  he  produced  a  particular 
Instruction  as  follows  : — 

"  Whereas,  in  the  present  circumstances  of  this  Church,  it  is  highly 
expedient  that  in  any  Meeting  of  the  Bishops  thereof,  nothing  be  treated  or 
discoursed  of  but  matters  purely  Ecclesiastical  ;  that  is,  such  only  as  con- 


ROBERT  KEITH.  257 

cern  the  pure  intrinsic!?-  Rights  of  the  Church,  as  derived  from  Christ  and 
his  Apostles,  and  practised  upon  in  the  first  Ages,  before  she  came  to  be 
under  any  legal  Establishment :  therefore,  I  appoint  you  in  my  name  to 
propose  this  in  the  Meeting,  and,  if  need  be,  to  give  vote,  as  my  Proxy,  that 
it  be  strictly  observed."  And  the  same  was  unanimously  agreed  to. 

Then  it  was  proposed  that  the  Concordate  of  the  year  1731  should  be 
read,  as  being  the  foundation  on  which  the  peace  and  unity  of  the  Church 
was  then  established,  which  was  produced  by  the  Clerk,  and  read  accord 
ingly  ;  and  the  Bishops  unanimously  approved  thereof  in  all  its  Articles. 

But  in  regard  the  true  design  and  intention  of  the  4th  Article  of  that 
Concordate  has  been  since  called  in  question — (The  Article  is  in  these 
words  : — "  That  the  Bishops  of  this  Church  shall,  by  majority  of  voices, 
cliuse  their  Primus,  for  convocating  and  presiding  only,  and  that  no  Bishop 
shall  claim  jurisdiction  without  the  bounds  of  his  own  District") — Mr. 
Lyon  produced  a  particular  Instruction  from  Bishop  Dunbar,  declaring  in 
what  sense  he  had  always  understood  that  Article,  which  is  as  follows  :— 
'•  AVhereas  by  the  Agreement  among  the  Bishops  of  this  Church  in  the  year 
1731,  all  claim  to  metropolitical  or  vice-metropolitical  powers  was  sett 
aside,  and  a  Primus  appointed  to  be  chosen  for  convocating  and  presiding 
only  :  therefore,  if  any  question  shall  arise  at  this  Meeting  concerning  the 
extent  of  these  powers  of  the  Primus — as  I  always  understood  the  office 
itself  to  be  designed  only  temporary,  and  likewise  that  he  was  to  act  nothing 
therein  without  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  majority — so  I  require  you,  as 
my  Proxy,  to  give  vote  and  suffrage  in  my  name,  conformable  to  this  my 
declared  sentiment ;  and  particularly,  that  if  the  Bishop  of  Edinr,  the  present 
Primus,  shall  pretend  either  to  adjourn  or  dissolve  this  ensuing  Meeting, 
contrary  to  the  advice  and  inclination  of  the  majority  of  Bishops,  or  shall 
anyways  withdraw  his  presence  from  it,  or  not  return  to  it  when  called  upon 
and  invited  by  his  Brethren  so  to  do,  that  then,  and  in  that  case,  you  give 
suffrage  in  my  name  that  the  Bishops  may  continue  to  sit  and  act  Synodi- 
cally  without  him,  and  require  you  to  sit  with  them  accordingly,  and  to 
proceed  with  them  to  the  choice  of  a  new  Primus." 

Bishops  Rattray  and  Keith,  who  had  been  present,  and  instrumental  in 
framing  that  Concordate,  declared  that  they  had  always  understood  the  4th 
Article  in  the  same  sense. 

That  the  late  Bishop  Gordon  had  also  so  understood  it,  appeared 
evident  not  only  from  his  written  declinatuje,  anno  1734,  but  also  by  the 
testimony  of  those  two  Bishops  (viz.,  Rattray  and  Keith),  who  declared  that, 
anno  1733,  when  Bishop  Freebairn  was  Elected  to  the  District  of  Edinr, 
Bishop  Gillan  proposed,  in  a  Meeting  of  the  Bishops  on  that  occasion,  that 
another  Primus  should  be  then  Elected,  lest  Bishop  Freebairn  should  come 
to  lay  claim  to  such  powers  as  had  been  claimed  by  his  Predecessors. 

The  same  further  appears  as  to  Bishop  Gillan,  from  a  Letter  wrote  by 
the  Rev.  Mr  Robert  Douglas,  in  his  own  name,  and  that  of  the  other  Pres 
byters  in  the  District  of  Dunblane,  to  Bishop  Freebairn,  of  July  15th,  1735, 
in  which  are  these  words — "  We  do  not  enter  upon  the  matter  of  what  is 
understood  by  your  being  Primus,  or  what  power  and  authority  is  implyed 
therein,  it  belonging  to  the  Colledge  of  Bishops  to  judge  in  that  affair,  not 
to  us ;  only  we  can  well  remember  that  our  late  worthy  Bishop  (Gillan) 
often  told  us  that  the  Primus  was  so  limited,  that  the  occasion  of  the 
Bishops  Meeting  was  always  to  be  communicated  together  with  the  Call." 

VOL.  II.  2  K 


258  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

And  that  Bishop  Freebairn  himself  did  then  understand  the  said  4th 
Article  in  the  same  sense  with  his  other  Brethren,  appeared  not  only  from 
the  Answer  which  these  two  Bishops  (Rattray  and  Keith)  declared  they 
heard  him  make  to  Bishop  Gillan's  Proposal — viz.,  that  he  should  never 
attempt  any  tiling  of  general  concern  without  the  consent  and  concurrence 
of  a  majority  of  his  Brethren  (upon  which  promise  of  his  Bishop  Gillan's 
Proposal  was  laid  aside) — hut  also  by  Original  Letters  under  his  own  hand, 
produced  and  read  in  the  Synod.  In  one  of  which,  addressed  to  Bishop 
Dunbar,  and  Dated  at  Edinr,  22d  Jan.,  1784,  he  has  these  words — "  In  short, 
I  see  no  better  way  to  compose  our  unhappy  differences  than  by  a  Meeting  of 
the  Bishops  whenever  the  season  of  the  year  will  allow  it ;  for  then  all  parties 
may  be  impartially  heard,  and  whatever  errour  they  may  find  in  my  conduct, 
I  shall  submit  to  their  censure,  even  tln'i  I  were  Metropolitan,  which  I  will 
never  be.  I  leave  that  to  aspiring  humours,  who  love  to  command  in 
chief."  In  another  Letter,  addressed  to  Bishop  Rattray,  Dated  at  Edinr,  3d 
Octr.,  1734,  and  which  was  the  Answer  to  a  Letter  Bishop  Rattray  had 
wrote  to  him,  Dated  at  Craighall,  17th  Augt.,  1734,  in  which  Bishop 
Rattray  had  said — "You  plainly  misconstruct  the  declinaturc  given  in  to 
you  by  your  Brethren,  as  if  they  thereby  denyed  you  that  poAver  of  convo- 
cating,  which  Avas  granted  to  the  Primus  by  the  Articles ;  Avhcreas  all  they 
insist  upon  is,  that  that  poAver  never  was  intended  to  be  unlimited  (AA'hich  I 
hope  you  yourself  upon  reflection  will  not  pretend),  notwithstanding  its 
being  expressed  in  general  terms.  One  case  you  may  remember  Avas 
particularly  mentioned,  viz., — If  the  rest  of  the  Bishops,  or  a  majority  of 
them,  should  find  it  necessary  to  haA'e  a  Meeting,  and  yet,  upon  their 
application  to  the  Primus,  he  should  refuse  to  coirvocate  them,  might  they 
not  meet  of  themselves  of  common  consent  ?  To  which  it  was  replycd,  no 
body  dissenting,  that  cases  of  that  nature  Avere  so  plain  (viz.,  from  the 
design  and  intention  of  the  Bishops  in  framing  that  Article)  that  there  was 
no  need  to  specify  them."  And  in  answer  to  this  part  of  Bishop  Rattray's 
Letter,  Bishop  Freebairn  says, — "  Xor  had  I  occasion  to  counteract  the  one 
thing  t'.rpn'x*!;/  im-ittioitnl,  nor  can  you  say  that  I  have  claimed  any  metro- 
politick  power,  nor  do  I  resolve  upon  it."  And  aftenvards,  in  that  same 
Letter,  Bishop  Freebairn  says, — "Because  the  Primus  can  do  nothing,  nor 
Avill  do  nothing,  but  in  conjunction  with  his  Brethren,  therefore  he  calls 
them  together  to  consider  such  and  such  exigencies  of  the  Church." 

All  which  evidence  being  laid  together,  and  fully  considered  by  the 
Synod,  they  declare  that  the  design  and  intendment  of  the  Bishops  in  this 
4th  Article  of  Agreement  in  1731  (Signed  by  such  of  them  as  were  present 
upon  20th  December)  must  have  been  that  the  Primus  was  to  be  ElectiA'e 
and  temporary  only ;  that  he  was  to  do  nothing  of  general  concernment 
but  by  the  concurrence  of  at  least  the  majority  of  his  Brethren  ;  and,  like 
wise,  that  if  at  any  time  he  should  refuse  to  concur  with  the  majority,  they 
might  meet  and  act  Synodically  without  him  ;  and  that  as  Bishop  Freebairn 
Avas  chosen  and  appointed  Primus  only  on  the  31st  day  of  that  same 
December,  according  to  the  4th  Article  of  Agreem1  (as  the  original  Deed  of 
Election  shoAvs),  so  he  could  have  no  other  powers  conferred  upon  him  by 
his  Brethren  than  such  as  were  intended  for  the  Primus  by  that  4th  Article. 
[But  such  a  poAver  as  Bishop  Freebairn  has  at  this  time  claimed,  and,  as  far 
as  he  could,  exercised — viz.,  to  call  the  other  Bishops  from  remote  parts  of 
the  Kingdom,  and  then  tell  them  they  may  go  home  again,  without  so  much 


HUBERT  KEITH.  259 

as  constituting  the  Synod  lie  had  called — is  so  far  from  being  competent  to  a 
limited  Primus,  that  it  is  more  than  any  Metropolitan  ever  pretended  to, 
and  must  appear  very  absurd  at  any  time,  but  especially  in  our  present 
situation.] 

And  moreover,  in  conformity  to  what  was  done  by  the  Bishops,  anno 
1731 — who,  after  they  had  agreed  to  a  particular  division  of  Districts,  added 
these  words,  viz.,  "By  the  aforesaid  division  of  Districts,  we  do  not 
pretend  to  claim  any  legal  title  to  Dioceses" — this  Synod  declares  that  the 
Bishops  do  not  arrogate  to  themselves  any  temporal  right  whatsoever,  or 
that  the  said  division  and  regulations,  or  any  other  that  has  been  or  may 
be  made  by  them,  ought  to  subsist,  in  case  it  shall  please  Almighty  God,  in 
the  course  of  His  providence,  at  any  time  hereafter  to  restore  the  Church  to 
a  legal  Establishment ;  nor  do  they  thereby  in  the  least  intend  to  encroach 
upon  the  just  rights  and  priviledges  competent  to  secular  powers  in 
Ecclesiastical  affairs. 

Then  the  Synod  appointed  Bishop  Eattray  and  Mr.  Lyou  to  go  this 
evening  to  Bishop  Freebairn,  and  to  invite  him  the  third  time  to  come  and 
take  his  place  in  the  Synod  the  morrow  forenoon,  and  to  advertise  him  that 
if  he  comes  not,  they  will  be  oblidged  to  proceed  to  the  Election  of  another 
Primus  in  his  room  ;  and  then  adjourned  till  to-morrowr  at  ten  forenoon. 

T/nti'sday,  13//<  >Tnli/,  /it  'Ten  Forenoon. 

The  Bishops  being  met,  and  Prayers  said,  Bishop  Hattray  and  Mr. 
Lyon  reported  that  they  had  been  the  evening  before  with  Bishop  Freebairn, 
and  delivered  to  him  the  message  as  directed  in  the  last  Session  ;  and  that 
he  had  declared  to  them  in  a  very  peremptory  manner  that  he  would  neither 
come  to  nor  any  way  countenance  their  Meeting,  and  that  they  might  do  as 
they  had  a  mind,  for  he  would  have  no  regard  to  it. 

Whereupon  the  Synod  proceeded  to  the  choice  of  another  Primus,  and 
the  Election  fell  upon  Bishop  Eattray,  who  declared  that  he  did  accept  the 
office  in  the  sense  and  import  of  the  4th  Article  of  the  Concordate,  as  above 
explained. 

The  Synod  then  declared,  that  thu  they  are  sensible  that  Bishop  Free 
bairn  has  rendered  himself  justly  obnoxious  to  censure  by  his  former 
breaches  of  the  Concordate,  and  especially  at  this  time,  by  refusing  to  con 
stitute  or  to  be  present  in  this  Synodical  Meeting,  which  he  himself  had 
called ;  yet,  out  of  a  tender  regard  to  his  great  age  and  infirmities,  they  are 
not  only  willing  to  forbear  any  proceeding  agl  him  at  this  time,  but  even 
to  allow  him  to  take  his  place  as  Primus  in  the  next  Synod,  provided 
he  shall  conform  himself  to  the  Concordate,  and  particularly  to  the  4th 
Article,  according  to  the  true  design  and  intendment  thereof.  And  Bishop 
Eattray,  the  new  Primus,  has  declared  that  in  that  case  he  shall  most 
willingly  resign  the  Chair  to  him. 

The  Synod  likewise  declares,  that  tho  Bishop  Ouchterlony  has  in  like 
manner  rendered  himself  justly  lyable  to  Censure,  for  disswading  and 
hindering  Bishop  Freebairn  from  constituting  the  present  Meeting,  when 
he  had  declared  again  and  again  that  he  was  willing  so  to  do,  as  well  as  for 
refusing  to  come  himself  to  the  Synod,  when  twice  invited  to  come — to  the 
second  of  which  Invitations,  he  not  only  gave  a  peremptory  answer  that  he 
would  not  come,  but  also  added  that  he  was  to  leave  the  City  next  morning 


200  DISTIUCT  OF  FIFE. 

(viz.,  the  morning  of  this  very  clay),  which  supersedes  any  further  Invitation 
as  to  him — yet,  since  they  have  thought  fit  not  to  proceed  against  Bishop 
Frecbairn,  they  have  likewise  condescended  to  forbear  any  proceeding  agl 
the  said  Mr.  Ouchterlouy  at  this  time. 

The  Synod  taking  next  under  their  consideration,  that  if  it  were  not 
timeously  prevented,  the  proper  Documents  and  Vouchers  of  the  Episcopal 
Succession  in  the  Church  might  come  to  perish,  ordered  Bishop  Keith  to 
make  a  Register  of  the  Consecrations  of  all  the  Bishops  thereof  since  the 
year  1088,  as  far  as  they  can  be  recovered;  and  that  he  keep  the  same, 
together  with  all  other  Papers  relating  to  Church  affairs  that  shall  come 
into  his  hands,  in  a  particular  Chest  by  themselves,  with  a  direction,  that  in 
case  of  his  death,  it  may  be  scaled  up  and  delivered  to  the  surviving  Bishops  ; 
and  it  is  recommended  to  all  the  Bishops  to  be  assisting  to  him  in  collecting 
this  Register. 

It  was  next  proposed  in  the  Synod  that  some  further  Catechetical 
Instructions  than  arc  contained  in  the  Liturgy  might  be  proper  for  the  use 
of  such  adult  persons  as  come  to  be  confirmed ;  which  Proposal  the  Bishops 
approved  of,  and  recommended  it  to  the  present  Primus  to  draw  up  some 
such  Instructions,  and  to  lay  them  before  the  next  Synod.  Then  adjourned 
till  to-morrow  at  four  afternoon. 


The  Bishops  being  met,  and  Prayers  said,  Bishop  White  represented  to 
the  Synod  that  Mr.  John  Graeme,  in  Southcrtoun,  had  desired  that  since 
Bishop  Piattray  had  quit  any  claim  to  him  as  a  Presbyter  of  his  District, 
and  that  he  had  thereupon  promised  Canonical  Obedience  to  Bishop  White, 
as  one  of  the  Presbyters  of  Dunblane,  his  case  should  be  laid  before  the  first 
Synodical  Meeting  of  the  Bishops,  that  he  might  have  their  determination 
concerning  it.  To  which  Bishop  Piattray  said  that,  altho  Mr.  Gneme's 
personal  residence,  and  the  place  of  his  Meeting  for  Publick  Worship,  was 
within  his  District,  yet,  inasmuch  as  by  far  the  greatest  part  of  his  Congre 
gation  is  within  the  District  of  Dunblane,  and  that  he  had  always  joyned 
with  the  Presbyters  of  that  District,  and  never  with  those  of  Dunkcld, 
therefore  he,  the  said  Bishop  Eattray,  neither  doth,  nor  ever  did,  claim  Mr. 
Gramae  as  one  of  his  Presbyters.  Whereupon  the  Synod  does  determine 
that  the  said  Mr.  John  Gromie,  in  Southertoun,  shall  belong  to  the  District 
of  Dunblane,  as  one  of  the  Presbyters  thereof;  and  adjourned  to  Monday 
17th,  at  four  afternoon. 

Mviiditi/,  17t/i  Jill;/,  nl  Fn\ir  Aj'tcnuxm. 

The  Bishops  being  met,  and  Prayers  said,  the  Minutes  of  all  the  former 
Sessions  were  read  and  considered,  and  it  was  judged  proper  that  a  Narrative 
of  all  that  had  passed  relative  to  this  Synodical  Meeting,  and  preceding  the 
constituting  the  same,  should  be  prefixed  to  the  present  Minutes;  and 
accordingly  Bishops  Eattray  and  Keith  were  appointed  by  the  Synod  to  draw 
up  the  said  Narrative,  and  the  Clerk  to  have  a  fair  Copy  written  out  both 
of  the  Narrative  and  Minutes,  to  be  Subscribed  by  all  the  Bishops,  and  like 
wise  a  Copy  of  them  for  each  Bishop,  to  be  attested  by  his  Subscription 
only ;  and  then  adjourned  to  Friday  the  28th  instant,  at  four  o'clock  after 
noon,  against  which  time  they  presumed  the  Copys  before-mentioned  would 
be  ready. 


EOBEET  KEITH. 


The  Bishops  being  met,  and  Prayers  said,  they  read  and  carefully 
compared  this  Copy  of  their  Minutes  and  Narrative  prefixed,  consisting 
of  this  and  the  foregoing  pages,  which  was  given  in  to  them  by  Bishop 
Keith,  their  Clerk,  according  to  the  appointment  of  the  former  Session  ;  and 
upon  finding  it  to  be  an  exact  Copy  (the  Copies  for  the  Bishops  not  being 
yet  ready),  they  appointed  the  Clerk  to  get  Extracts  from  it  for  each 
particular  Bishop  finished,  and  transmitted  to  them  with  all  convenient 
speed ;  and  then  agreed  that  this  Copy  be  Subscribed  by  all  the  Bishops 
present,  and  by  Bishop  Duribar's  Proxy,  and  every  page  Subscribed  by  the 
Primus,  to  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  Clerk,  as  an  authcntick  Piecord  of 
what  hath  been  transacted  in  the  several  Sessions  of  this  Meeting ;  and  that 
the  Synod  be  then,  and  accordingly  it  is  hereby,  dissolved  by  the  Primus. 

(Sic  Subscr.) 

At  the  Consecration  of  a  Successor  to  Bishop  Rattray  in  the 
Diocese  of  Dunkeld,  which  was  performed  at  Edinburgh  by  the 
Bishops  Keith,  Falconar,  White,  and  Rait,  it  was  resolved  by 
these  Fathers  that  they  should  constitute  themselves  into  a 
Regular  Synod  for  transacting  the  public  business  of  the  Church ; 
on  which  occasion  Mr.  Keith  was  unanimously  chosen  Primus, 
and  Mr.  Alexander,  the  new  Bishop,  was  appointed  Clerk. 
Availing  themselves  of  the  Ecclesiastical  knowledge  and  matured 
experience  of  the  late  Primus  (Rattray),  the  Bishops,  being  thus 
met  together,  proceeded  to  take  into  consideration  the  draught  of 
certain  Canons  which  he  had  bequeathed  to  them,  for  the  more 
formal  exercise  of  their  authority  in  the  Government  of  their 
Districts  ;  and,  after  a  deliberate  Conference,  they  succeeded— as 
well  by  making  suitable  alterations  on  those  with  which  they 
were  thus  furnished,  as  by  drawing  up  several  new  ones — in  pro 
ducing  a  Set  of  Rules  which  gained  at  once  the  universal 
acceptance  of  the  Clergy,  and  also  proved  of  considerable  use  in 
promoting  uniformity  of  sentiment  as  well  as  of  practice  in  almost 
all  the  professional  matters  concerning  which  they  had  been 
formerly  divided.  The  Rules  are  given  in  Skinner's  Ecclesias 
tical  History,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  655-GCO;  in  Stephen's  History  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  295-298 ;  and  in  Grub's 
Ecclesiastical  History  of  Scotland,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  14-17. 

Bishop  Keith's  Deputation  to  Bi$Jio}>  Alexander  for  the  Ordination  of 
Mr.  Robertson. 

E.  E.  Br., — Our  Eeverend  Brother,  Mr.  Alexander  Hunter,   of  this 


262  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

City,  having  delivered  to  me  a  Letter  from  you  to  him,  by  wc  you  desire  yl 
application  may  be  made  to  me  in  behalf  of  Mr.  liobcrtson,  AY!IO  is  in 
expectation  of  being  emplotyed  in  c  Holy  Ministry  in  c  vacant  District  of 
Glasgow,  the  charge  of  which  pertains  to  me  as  Primus,  and  appointed  as 
such  to  have  the  inspection  of  all  e  vacant  Districts  within  this  National 
Church — I  hereby  declare  y'  I  am  willing  yl  you,  in  whose  District  the  young 
man  has  formerly  resided,  may  proceed  in  the  usual  form  to  take  Trial  of 
him,  and,  if  found  duely  qualified,  to  confer  Holy  Orders,  y'  he  may  be 
collated  to  that  Charge  which  is  intended  for  him.  This  I  write  in  con 
formity  to  your  own  Proposal  contained  in  your  Letter,  and  am,  D.  S., 

Your  most  affectionate  Brother  and  humble  Servant, 
Ed1,  March  20,  1711.  KOBERT  KEITH. 

The  following  is  written  on  the  opposite  page  of  the  above  Letter  :— 

E.  11.  Sir, — "What  is  on  the  ovr  page  will,  I  hope,  be  sufficient  for 
your  being  so  good  as  to  hasten  Mr.  liobertsou's  Trials,  for  which  you 
have  Bishop  Keith's  desire,  and  the  more  so  that  I  have  a  Letter  from  one 
of  the  gentlemen  this  day,  wherein  he  tells  me  that  he,  with  oyrs  concerned, 
have  finished  their  Subscription,  and  are  desirous  to  have  Mr.  Piobertson  putt 
in  Orders  as  soon  as  possible,  being  recommended  to  'em  by  c  Viscount  of 
Stcrmont.  They  are  very  sensible  of  the  loss  they  have  sustained  so  long, 
and  arc  well  satisfied  wl  the  agreeable  character  they  have  gott  of  c  young 
man  from  that  Nobleman,  who  is  so  good  a  judge.  I  wish  you  'many 
returns  of  the  happy  festival  past,  and  am,  wl  respect, 

11.  II.  Sir, 
Your  most  humble  and  obedient  Servant, 

Edr,  March  21),  1711.  ALEXR.  HUNTER. 

It  is  a  trite  observation  that  the  man  who  most  conscien 
tiously  does  his  duty  is  not  always  rewarded  with  the  first  burst 
of  popular  praise ;  and  we  find  accordingly  that  Bishop  Keith 
was  by  no  means  beloved  by  the  Presbyters  of  Edinburgh,  among 
whom  he  had  been  so  many  years  resident.  He  was  seldom 
asked  by  any  of  them  to  perform  in  their  Congregations  the 
Offices  peculiar  to  his  Order;  and  if  we  were  to  judge  from  a 
variety  of  Addresses,  Remonstrances,  and  Replies,  which  are 
still  on  record,  we  should  say  that  his  intercourse  with  the 
"inferior"  Clergy  was  almost  entirely  confined  to  Disputes  about 
the  limits  of  Episcopal  Jurisdiction,  and  the  Privileges  of  the 
Priesthood. 

The  Presbyters  of  Edinburgh,  who,  at  the  period  in  question, 
used  to  Elect  a  Moderator,  and  assume  considerable  powers  as  a 
regular  and  standing  Presbytery,  were  extremely  jealous  of  any 
higher  authority  in  the  Church ;  whilst  the  Bishops,  on  the  other 


ROBERT  KEITH.  208 

hand — regulating  their  proceedings  by  a  regard  to  abstract 
principle  and  ancient  usage,  rather  than  by  a  due  consideration 
of  the  circumstances  in  which  late  events  had  placed  their  Com 
munion,  and  still  less  by  views  of  mere  expediency — appear,  on 
several  occasions,  to  have  aimed  at  the  possession  of  a  degree  of 
power,  the  exercise  of  which  would  inevitably  have  sunk  the 
Second  Order  of  Ministers  into  absolute  insignificance.  The 
enactment  of  Canons  in  1743,  as  Laws  regulating  the  Practice 
and  defining  the  Obedience  of  the  whole  Church,  without  de 
siring  the  advice  or  concurrence  of  any  of  the  Presbyters,  was  a 
stretch  of  prerogative  which  could  not  prove  agreeable  to  the 
latter  description  of  Clergy ;  and  although  the  Bishops  might 
have  no  difficulty  in  proving  that  they  had  not  on  this  occasion 
exceeded  the  limits  of  the  authority  inherent  in  their  Order,  and 
which  had  been  frequently  exercised  by  the  Rulers  of  the  Church 
in  the  purest  times  of  Christianity,  they  would  yet  have  attained 
their  object  more  effectually  by  conceding  a  little  to  the  spirit  of 
the  age  and  the  wishes  of  their  Brethren. 


21.  (Holograph  Original)  Bishop  Keith  to  Bishop  Rattray,  Aprilo  C, 
1741,  containing  an  Account  of  said  K.  his  Conference  w'  a  certain  Factor 
—"No  Bishop  in  the  world  could  do  such  a  thing  as  promote  W.  II." 
'•  Such  a  thing  (said  Factor)  should  have  been  told  sooner,  and  not  suffer  it 
to  lie  in  the  shape  of  Disobedience.  Well  (continued  he)  it  is  desired  to 
receive  R.  B."  "It  was  contrary  to  the  scheme,  that  nominating  should 
proceed  from  the  Bishops  ;  nay,  that  they  were  empowered  to  bring  in 
whom  they  thought  fitt,"  Ac. 

23.  Holograph  of  Bishop  Keith,  June  12,  1742,  after  the  Death  of 
Bishop  Ouchterlonie,  for  information  of,  &"c. ;  how  matters  now  stand,  &c. ; 
and  what  happened  upon  this  is  well  known  ;  but  the  death  of  Bishop 
Rattray  the  year  following  put  a  stop  to  what  was  intended,  &c. 


5.  Original  of  Concordate,  or  Articles  of  Agreement,  Decemr.  20  and 
31,  1731,  in  ye  Handwritings  of  Bishops  Keith  and  Gillan,  and  Subscribed 
by  nine  Bishops. 

0.  Two  Originals  of  Canons,  June,  1733,  the  one  in  the  Handwriting  of 
Bishop  Rattray,  the  other  in  yl  of  Bishop  Keith,  and  both  without  any  Date, 
tho  Subscribed  by  all  ye  Bishops. 

7.  Original  Declaration,  wlout  any  Date,  of  Bishops  Rattray,  Dunbar, 
Keith,  and  White,  w'  ye  adherence  of  Bishops  Falconar,  Rait,  and  Alexander' 
and  that  of  Mr.  George  Hay,  Elect  of  Murray  and  Ross,  who  Died  before  he 


2G4  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

was  Consecrated ;  not  to  assume  any  into  yr  Order  without  ye  consent  and 
approbation  of  the  majority  of  said  Order,  and  yl  all  matters  Ecclesiastical 
shall  be  determined  by  the  same  majority. 

8.  First  (Original)  Synod,  1788  ;  Mr.  Eobt.  Lyon  Subscribing  as  Proxy 
for  Bishop  Dunbar. 

9.  Second  (Original)  Synod,  1788,  containing  Bishop  Dunbar's  Confirma 
tion  ;  and  in  which  arc  contained  the  folding  loose  Papers,  viz. : — Two 
Copies  of  Bishop  Freebairn's  Narrative,  or  Account  of  what  passed  at  the 
intended,  but  not  kept,  Meeting  of  the  Bishops  in  1788  ;   Original  Letter  of 
Proxy,  Bishop  ])unbar  to  Mr.  Piobert  Lyon,  1788;   Original  and  additional 
Instructions  by  Do.  to  ])o.,  1788;   and  two  Original  Letters,  Bishop  Free- 
bairn  to  Bishops  ItaUray  and  Keith,  declining,  in  name  of  himself  and  of 
Bishop  Ouclitcrlonie,  meeting  at  said  Synod  without  previous  Conference. 
Ed1',  Monday  night. 

11.  (Original  Holograph)  Mr.  Robert  Lyon  to  Bishop  Ouchterlonie, 
particularly  as  to  what  passed  between  them  in  the  house  of  Bishop  Free- 
bairn  on  July  11,  1788,  about  recommending  to  a  third  person,  persons  fit 
for  the  Episcopate,  as  Mr.  "William  Harper,  senior,  was  not  thus  properly 
recommended,  as  Bishop  Ouchterlonie  acknowledged,  which  he  had  also 
declared  to  Mr.  Thomas  Ruddiman ;  likewise  about  Bishop  White's  Conse 
cration,  &c.,  w'out  any  Date. 

1'2.  (Original)  Resolve  or  Declaration  (17-15)  of  Bishops  Keith,  Dunbar, 
Fnlconar,  and  Alexander,  not  to  assume  any  into  yr  Order  without  previous 
Subscription  to  ye  Minutes  of  Synodical  Meetings  from  1788  to  1745. 

20.  (Copy)  Bishop  Keith  to  Bishop  Raitt,  in  Bishop  Keith's  shorthand, 
Octor.  10,  1718,  apologetic  of  his  translating  of  some  of  the  Addresses  to  ye 
Virgin.  Mary  in  his  Preface  to  Vol.   2d  of  ye   Select  Pieces  of  Thomas  a 
Kempis,   translated   into   English ;    and  upon   ye  same   half  sheet   (Copy) 
Bishop  Keith  to  Bishop  "White,  in  Keith's  shorthand,  Sept.  10,  1748,  con 
cerning  the  Clergy  of  Edin1',  their  not  Publishing  the  Deposition  of  Mr.  D. 
Fife,  &c.;   and  the  opinion  of  Bishop   Smith  when   in  Edr,   that  the,  said 
Fife  deserved  well  all  he  had  mett  with,  yet  he  wished  suspension  had  been 
first    tried,    and   that,   upon  Mr.    Fife's    submission    and  acknowledgment, 
Bishop  Smith  had  proposed  a  relaxation  of  the  Deposition  ;  and  prayed  his 
opinion  might  be  communicated  to  all  ye  Bishops. 

21.  (Holograph)  Viscount  of  Arbuthuot  to  Bishop  Keith,  Octor.   10, 
1743,  about  his  not  promulgating  in  his  Chapel  ye  sentence  of  Deposition 
against  Mr.  Fife,  together  w;  Copy  of  Bishop  Keith's  Answer  to  the  same,  in 
his  own  shorthand,  Octor.  21,  1748. 

22.  Three  Duplicates  and  seven  Originals  of  the  Declaration,  Subscribed 
by   the   Bishops   and   Presbyters    of   Scotland,   1744,   against  ye    usurped 
authority  of  Bishop  Smith  of  England  over   the   Church   of  Scotland,   of 
which  four  attested  Copies  were  sent  into  England  in  1745 — viz.,  one  to 
each  of  the  three  Bishops,  Smith,  Gordoun,  and  Mawman,  and  one  to  Mr. 
Robt.  Lyon. 

23.  Two  Copies  of  a  List  of  the  several  Synodical  Meetings  of  the 
Bishops,  and  of  the  several  Canons  enacted  thereat,  since  the  Revolution, 
and  an  excellent  vindication  of  the  Bishops  for  their  thus  enacting.     One  of 
these  Copies  is  Holograph  of  Bishop  Keith,  and  seems  to  be  the  jiriiiia  cum 
of  the  other.     Nine  Meetings  in  all,  viz.,  (1)  May  5,  1720,  herein  Copy  of 
Canons  then  enacted  ;  (2)  Febry.,  1723  ;  (8)  July,  1724  ;  (4)  Decemr.,  1731 ; 


ROBERT  KEITH.  2G5 

(5)  June,  1733;  (G)  July,  1738;  (7)  Augt.,  1743;  (8)  that  in  1727  is  pur 
posely  omitted,  because  then  there  was  another  set  of  Bishops  (i.e.,  at  large), 
who  did  not  concur — "No  Presbyter  was  present,  or  claimed  to  be  present, 
nor  did  any  Presbyters  ever  complain  of  their  not  being  called  to  any  of  the 
foregoing  Synods  or  Meetings  of  the  Bishops,  in  each  of  which  some  Canons 
or  Regulations  were  constantly  enacted,  according  as  circumstances  required; 
and  no  want  of  authority  was  ever  pretended  till  1743,  and  then  only  by  a 
few,"  tho  the  Canon  of  Exemption  so  loudly  cried  out  agl  had  been  enacted 
at  Alloa  ;  (0)  Septemr.  10,  1741,  which  may  serve  to  bring  the  Meetings  or 
Synods  of  Bishops  up  to  the  number,  nine. 

24.  (Copy)  Dialogue  between  E.  and  S.  (i.e.,  I  suppose,  England  and 
Scotland)  about  ye  Synod  in  Augt.,  1743,  in  which  it  is  represented  that  no 
such  thing  as  a  National  Synod  or  General  Assembly — the  most  classical 
name — was  held  in  Scotland  from  1GG3  to  1680  :  a  curious  Paper,  authenti 
cated  by  the  manual  corrections  of  Bishop  Keith,  in  18  pages  4to. 

25.  (Original)  Letter  to   Bishop   Keith   from   the   other  Bishops,  in 
timating  the  Consecration  of  Mr.  Andrew  Gerard  to  ye  Episcopate,  Cupar  of 
Fife,  July  17.  1747. 

Xmnler  8. 

11.  (Original)  July  14,  1735,  sent  to  Bishop  Keith— "  To  the  R.  R. 
Dr.  Thomas  Rattray  of  Craighall,  Mr.  William  Dunbar,  and  Mr.  Robert 
Keith,  Bishops, — the  Admonition  and  Remonstrance  of  Mr.  David  Freebairn, 
Bishop  of  Edr,  Primus,"  in  35  pages  folio. 

12.  An   excellent  Memorial,   in  ye  Handwriting   of  Bishop  Rattray, 
without  any  Date,  of  Church  affairs,  from  the  Concordate  in  1731  to  1740, 
in  which  particularly,  that  Mr.  Robert  Freebairn,  in  procuring  Nominations 
in  1733,  acted  without  any  colour  of  commission  from  the  Bishops — his  own 
father   not  excepted — who,    by  the  by,  had  renounced   all   metropolitical 
powers.      N.B.- — It  is  very  proper  this  Paper  should  be  deposited  beside,  or 
tacked  to,  Bishop  Freebairn's  Admonition  and  Remonstrance  in  1735.     In 
this   Memorial  is   deposited  Original    of  Bishop   Keith,  in  his  own  short 
hand,    to   Bishops    Rattray   and  Dunbar,  June    12,    1741,   exhorting   and 
requesting  such  another  Memorial  to  be  drawn  up,  to  be  sent  to  a  particular 
friend  ;  and  some  sketch  is  given  of  one,  &c. 

13.  (Copy)  Bishop  Rattray 's  Answer  to  Bishop  Freebairn's  Admonition, 
&c.,  Augt.  1,  1735. 

14.  (Two  Copies)  Bishop  Keith's  Answer  to  Bishop  Freebairn's  Ad 
monition,   &c.,  Augt.  20,  1735 — the   second  Copy  being  authenticated  by 
Bishop  Keith's  own  Subscription,  and  containing  somewhat  not  in  the  other 
Copy. 

15.  Mr.  Robert  Freebairn's  Original  Anonymous  Letter  of  Septemr.  25, 
1735,  to  Bishop  Keith,  on  his  seeing  his  Answer  to  said  Admonition,  &c. 
Bishop  Keith  took  no  notice  of  this  Letter. 

1G.  Bishop  Dunbar's  Answer  (Copy)  to  said  Admonition,  &c.,  Septemr. 
G,  1735. 

17.  Prima  Cura  of  Bishop  Keith,  in  his  own  shorthand,  Decemr.   5, 
1743,  to  Mr.  Thomas  Auchiuleck,  to  convocate  his  Brethren  for  Election  of 
a  Dean,  &c.,  and  informing  of  Transactions  of  Synod,  1743. 

18.  An  Extract  of  a  Copy  of  the  first  Address,  Jamy.  17,  1744— "  To 
ye  R.  R.  the  Bishops  of  all  the  Churches  in  Scotland,  the  Presbyters  of  ye 
Diocese  of  Edinr  send  greeting." 

VOL.   II.  2  L 


2»'.(i  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

19.  Copies  of  two  sets  of  Queries,  w'out  Date,  in  answer  to  the  said 
first  Address. 

20.  (Original)  Survey  of  said  Queries,  without  Date,  wrapt  up  in  a 
blank  cover,  sealed  and  backed  thus — '-A  Letter  to  lie  left  at  Mr.  Keith's 
Vestry.'' 

21.  (Copy)  Bishop  "White  to  Bishop  Keith,  Febry.  3d,  17-14,  upon  said 
first  Address,  about  which  Bishop  Eaitt  (Copy  on  the  same  bit  of  paper, 
Febry.   25,   1741)  to  Bishop  White   says — '•  He   detests   and  abhors    their 
insolence,  and  condemns  their  claim  to  a  decisive  vote  in  Synods." 

22.  Priina  Cura  of  Bishop  Keith  to  Bishop  Alexander,  Febry.  20,  1744  ; 
concise  and  strong  on  said  first  Address. 

23.  Two  Copies  of  an  Answer,  Janry.  28,  1744,  Bishop  Dunbar  to  the 
Presbyters  of  Edinr,  on  their  said  first  Address. 

21.  (Copy)  Fi'bry.  22.  1711,  Mr.  Andrew  Gerard  to  Mr.  Alexr.  Hunter; 
strong  and  pointed  as  to  ve  unseasonableness  and  improprietv  of  said  first 

411  i-J.«. 

Address. 

25.  (Holograph  Original)  Bishop  Alexander's  Answer,  May  10,  1744,  to 
said  first  Address;  full  and  home  to  ye  purpose,  with  much  sincerity  and 
plainness. 

20.  (Copy)  Second  Address  of  the  Presbyters  of  Edinr  to  the  Bishops, 
July  27.  174  1,  with  suitable  marginal  notes.  This  Address  was  directed,  by 
way  of  missive,  to  Bishop  Keith,  who  received  it  on  Friday,  July  27,  at  8  iii 
ye  evening;  in  the  Handwriting  of  Mr.  Alexr.  Robcrtsonc,  to  whom  Bishop 
Keith  sent  it  back  next  morning,  without  any  Answer  by  word  or  writ,  and 
without  taking  a  Copy  of  it. 

27.  (Original)  Third  Address  of  the  Presbyters  of  Edinr  to  the  Bishops, 
Deer.  2,  1744.     N.B.— This  is  ye  Paper  which  Mr.  Robert  Forbes,  in  the 
Meeting,  when  forced  to  give  his  real  opinion  of  it,  called  "  The  Lamb  and 
the  Tyger,"  from  the  Frenchified  smoothness  of  ye  Preface,  drawn  up  by  Mr. 
Patrick  Gordon,  and  the  snarling  teeth  of  the'  Articles,  drawn  up  by  Mr. 
Alexr.  Robertson. 

28.  (Copy)  Bishop  Dunbar's  short  and  substantial  Answer,  Febry.  1745, 
to  said  third  Address. 

29.  (Copy)  Presbyters  of  Dunkeld  to  Bishop  Alexander,  Febry.  1,  1744, 
declaring  their  abhorrence  of  the  first  Address  from  the  Presbyters  of  Edr  to 
the  Bishops. 

30.  (Copy)  Bishop  Keith's  Answer  to  the  third  Address  of  the  Pres 
byters  of  Edinr,  Janry.  25,  1745,  addressed  thus  on  the  top — "  To  Messrs. 
Jas.  M'Kenzie,  William  Harper,  Jo.  Mackenzie,  Alexr.  Mackenzie,  Alexr. 
Robertson,  David  Rae,  Pa.  Gordon,  Presbyters  in  Edr,  and  William  Law, 
Presbyter  in  Leith,  and  authenticated  by  Bishop  Keith's  own  Subscription." 

31.  (Original  and  Copy)  Febry.  7,  1745,  Answer  of  the  above   eight 
Brethren  to  Bishop  Keith's  said  Return  of  Janry.  25,  1745.     N.B. — This 
may  be  called  the  fourth  Address. 

82.  (Copy)  Bishop  Keith's  long  and  general  Reply,  Augt.  27,  1745,  to 
all  the  Papers  and  Addresses  of  the  Presbyters  of  Edinr,  authenticated  by 
Bishop  Keith's  own  Subscription — the  Original  having  been  wrapt  up  in  a 
Letter,  and  sent  to  the  R.  Mr.  James  Mackenzie,  the  then  Moderator.  This 
is  a  very  strong  and  pointed  Paper,  never  yet  attempted  to  be  answered. 

33.  (Prima  Cura)  Bishop  Keith  to  Mr.  Thomas  Auchinleck,  in  Mr. 
Keith's  own  hand,  Octor.  0,  1744,  inclosing  a  Note  declarative  of  Bishop 
Keith's  having  never  solicited  in  any  shape  to  be  Bishop  of  Edr;  but,  on  the 


ROBERT  KEITH.  207 

contrary,  that  lie  had  declined  to  be  Bishop  of  Ed1'  when  it  was  in  his 
offer. 

8-1.  (Prima  Cura)  Do.  to  Do..  Dccenir.  5.  1711.  in  Bishop  Keith's  own 
hand,  in  which  was  enclosed  Copy  of  a  Disclamation  of  Bishop  Smith's 
encroachments,  to  be  offered  to  the  Presbytery  of  Edinrfor  their  Subscriptions 
to  it ;  which  they,  two  or  three  excepted.  refused  to  do. 

85.  (Copy)  Absalom,  or  Remarks  on  ye  Admonition  and  Remonstrance, 
falsely  ascribed  to  Bishop  Freebairn,  without  any  Date. 

A  tniil>c>'  15. 

0.  (Holograph  Original)  Bishop  Keith's  common  Form  of  Baptizing 
Children  ;  in  his  own  Handwriting. 

28.  Originals  and  Copies  of  Letters  between  Bishop  Keith  and  Mr.  John 
M'Kenzie  in  1711.  Herein  the  true  meaning  of  "  One  Bishop  in  one  City" 
fairly  represented.  X.B. — Some  Differences  had  arisen  'twixt  them  about 
Emoluments,  &c.  Bishop  Keith  having  told  J.  M.  that  he  was  no  moneyed 
man,  and  that  therefore  he  needed  somewhat  more  than  an  c<[ual  dividend, 
and  that  if  his  circumstances  did  not  require  it,  he  would  not  have  asked  it  ; 
but  J.  M.  would  not  listen  to  any  other  division  than  that  of  an  equal  share 
to  each.  But  behold  the  upshot  of  all !  Bishop  Keith,  a  married  man,  and 
having  children,  Died  worth  only  £150  Sterling  at  most ;  and  J.  M.,  a 
Bachelor,  Died  (j>r<>h  dolor .' )  worth  about  X'3000  Sterling,  and  left  not  a  Single 
Earthing  to  ye  poor  suffering  Clergy  ! 

Bishop  Keith  had  his  own  share  in  the  trials  of  his  age.  His 
local  situation  as  being  resident  in  the  Metropolis,  his  official 
station  as  Primus,  and,  above  all,  perhaps,  his  personal  influence 
as  a  man  of  business  as  well  as  of  letters,  will  account  for  the 
prominent  part  he  acted  as  the  Representative  and  Advocate  of 
the  Episcopal  Synod.  But  the  events  of  1745  and  of  the  follow 
ing  year  engaged  the  Country,  and  especially  the  Church  over 
which  Bishop  Keith  presided,  in  a  struggle  of  a  different 
character ;  the  result  of  which,  and  the  consequences  which 
attended  that  result  in  reference  to  Scottish  Episcopacy,  are  too 
important  to  be  detailed  in  a  Biographical  outline,  and  have  been 
already  laid  before  the  world  in  a  variety  of  Publications. 

The  pressure  of  the  Penal  Laws  inflicted  by  the  Government 
in  1746  and  1748,  seems  to  have  silenced  even  the  voice  of  Con 
troversy.  About  the  3*ear  1752,  Bishop  Keith  left  his  usual 
residence  in  the  Canongate,  and  fixed  his  abode  in  the  neighbour 
hood  of  Leith,  on  a  small  property  called  Bonnyhaugh,  which 
afterwards  descended  by  inheritance  to  his  daughter  and  grand 
daughter. 


20*  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

The  Literary  labours  of  Bishop  Keith  are  well  known  to  every 
Scholar  and  Antiquary.  His  greatest  Work,  "  The  History  of 
tho  Affairs  of  Church  and  State  in  Scotland,  from  the  be^innino- 

O  O 

of  the  Reformation  in  the  Reign  of  King  James  V.,  to  the  Retreat 
of  Queen  Mary  into  England,"  is  chiefly  esteemed  for  the  im 
mense  Collection  of  authentic  Documents  with  which  he  con 
trived  to  enrich  it. 

The  Rev.  J.  Parker  Lawson,  in  the  Biographical  Sketch  of 
Keith,  prefixed  to  the  Spottiswoode  Edition  of  the  History,  says  : 

It  appeared  in  Folio,  and  was  Printed  1>y  the  celebrated  Scholars, 
Thomas  jaid  Walter  Piuddiman,  for  George  Stewart  and  Alexander  Symmer, 
who  arc  described  as  ••  Undcrf/iforx"  and  "  sold  by  them  and  Gavin  Hamil 
ton,  Bookseller."  It  was  Published  by  Subscription,  and  was  Dedicated  to 
Lady  Jane  Douglas,  the  only  daughter  of  James,  second  Marquis,  and  sister 
of  Archibald,  third  Marquis,  created  Duke  of  Douglas  in  1703.  The 
Marriage  of  this  Lady  in  1710,  when  in  the  forty- eighth  year  of  her  age,  to 
Colonel,  afterwards  Sir  John  Stewart,  Bart.,  of  Cirandtully,  originated  the 
celebrated  ])<»i<il«*  Came.  Bishop  Keith,  by  his  grandmother,  who  was  a 
daughter  of  Gavin  Douglas  of  Easter  Ban-as,  claimed  relationship  to  "the 
Dukes  of  Douglas  and  Hamilton,  and  to  all  the  brandies  of  these  most 
honourable  Families."  The  "  List  of  Subscribers"  is  remarkably  curious, 
comprising  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  at  Edinburgh,  the 
Society  of  Writers  there,  the  Society  of  Writers  at  Stirling,  the  Scottish 
College  at  Paris,  and  ittU  individuals,  many  of  whom  were  persons  of  the 
first  rank  in  the  Kingdom.  The  List  has  been  designated  a:  kind  of 
'•  MII <!<')•  Unit"  of  the  principal  Jacobite  Xobility  and  Gentry  of  Scotland  at 
the  time;  but  this,  as  is  subsequently  noticed,  is  incorrect;  and  an  examina 
tion  of  it  proves  that  many  of  them  were  staunch  supporters  of  the  House  of 
Hanover,  such  as  the  celebrated  Duncan  Forbes  of  Culloden,  afterwards 
Lord  President  of  the  Court  of  Session  ;  Sir  William  Nairn  of  Dunsiiman  ; 
He\v  Dalrymple  of  Drummorc,  a  Judge  in  the  Supreme  Court  by  the  Title  of 
Lord  Druumiore  ;  Sir  James  Dalrymple  of  Hailes,  Bart. ;  Erskine  of  Dun, 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  of  Minto,  and  Sir  Alexander  Ogilvic  of  Forglen— three 
gentlemen  who  were  also  Judges ;  and  several  of  the  Xobility,  who  had  no 
connection  with  the  Enterprizes  of  171-">  and  1745.  Among  the  names 
occurs  that  of  the  famous  Hob  Ixoy,  who  is  designated  "Robert  Macgregor, 
"/m.s  Rob  Pioy,"  and  who  figures  after  his  relative,  Macgregor  of  Gleiigyle. 
It  would  be  interesting  to  ascertain  what  induced  Rob  Hoy  to  appear  in 
the  character  of  an  encourager  of  Literature  ;  but  it  is  not  likely  that  he  ever 
read  the  Work,  as  he  Died  during  the  year  after  its  Publication,  and  his 
well-known  avocations  had  no  connection  with  Historical  Researches. 
Another  name  is  that  of  the  "  Rev.  Mr.  Robert  Blair,"  who  is  considered  to 
be  the  well-known  Author  of  "  The  Grave,"  and  who  was  the  Established 
Presbyterian  Minister  of  the  Parish  of  Athelstaneford  in  Haddingtonshire. 

Keith's  Work  is  one  of  the  great  sources  from  which  Dr. 
George  Cook  derived  his  "History  of  the  Reformation  in  Scot- 


U013EUT  KEITH.  201) 

land,"  Published  at  Edinburgh  in  three  Volumes  in  1811.  To  it 
the  Rev.  John  Skinner  was  greatly  indebted  for  materials  in  his 
"Ecclesiastical  History  of  Scotland,"  Published  at  London  in 
two  Volumes  in  1788 ;  and  the  obligations  of  Principal  Robert- 
son  and  Mr.  Tytler  are  equally  due  to  the  industry  of  Bishop 
Keith. 

"  Such  a  Book,"  says  the  Xonjuring  Bishop  Smith,  Keith's 
Correspondent  and  Antagonist,  "will  stand  the  test  of  ages,  and 
will  always  be  valued,  because  no  fact  is  related  but  upon  the  best 
authority."  The  Author  (Bishop  Russell  says)  has  not  escaped 
the  charge  of  partiality  in  his  views,  and  of  a  certain  bias  in  his 
reasonings,  but  he  has  always  been  allowed  the  merit  of  a  full 
and  candid  statement  of  events,  whatever  might  be  their  effect 
upon  his  own  conclusions,  and  has  never  been  taxed,  even  by  the 
most  uncharitable  adversaries,  with  mutilating  Records,  either 
to  screen  the  reputation  of  a  friend,  or  to  impeach  the  motives  of 
an  enemy.  His  stately  Volumes,  therefore,  will  never  cease  to 
occupy  a  respectable  place  in  the  Library  of  the  Historian ;  and 
every  Reader  who  is  desirous  to  have  an  intimate  acquaintance 
with  the  Annals  of  Scotland  during  the  troubled  and  afflicted 
times  which  followed  upon  the  Death  of  our  Fifth  James,  will 
regret  that  Bishop  Keith  did  not  live  to  complete  his  arduous 
undertaking.  It  appears  that  he  left  at  his  Death  a  few  Sheets 
of  the  second  Volume.  These,  with  certain  other  Manuscripts, 
must  have  passed  into  the  hands  of  his  daughter's  family ;  but 
all  the  inquiry  that  I  have  made  respecting  them,  has  only 
satisfied  me  that  they  are  no  longer  in  existence. 

Bishop  Keith's  private  Copy  of  his  "History,"  with  his  own 
annotations,  corrections,  and  additions,  is  said  to  have  been 
acquired  by  Sir  Walter  Scott,  Bart.,  and  to  be  in  the  Library 
of  Abbotsford. 

The  Catalogue  oj  Scottixlt  ]>is]ioj>x  was  given  to  the  world  in 
1755.  It  was  Dedicated  to  the  celebrated  Marshal  Keith,  at 
that  time  in  the  service  of  the  Prussian  Monarch  ;  and  a  Copy 
of  it  was  sent  to  Berlin,  accompanied  with  the  following  Letter, 
which,  together  with  the  Answer,  is  here  inserted  for  the  amuse 
ment  of  the  Reader  :— 


270  DibTUlCT  OF  FIFE. 


///.s  E 


eiicy 


[Sir,  —  This  comes  l>y  Hubert  Koith,  my  grand-nephew,  and  son  to 
Alexander  Keith  of  Urns,  who  was  your  servant  at  the  time  I  had  the 
honour  to  he  preceptor  to  you  and  your  brother,  the  Earl.  This  lad's  elder 
brother,  Alexander,  was  at  Paris  last  year;  and  as  he  was  bred  a  sailor,  the 
Earl  was  pleased  to  take  particular  care  of  him,  and  to  provide  for  him 
according  to  his  education. 

Your  Excellency  will  see  how  I  have  been  employed  of  late,  from  the 
Book  herewith  sent  ;  three  Copies  of  which  come  to  your  hands  —  one  for  the 
King  of  Prussia,  a  second  for  the  Earl,  and  a  third  for  yourself  —  by  this 
same  young  man.  whom  hereby  I  beg  to  recommend  to  your  patronage  and 
friendship  ;  and  as  he  inclines  to  be  bred  to  the  sea,  he  may  perhaps  turn 
out  to  be  useful  to  the  King  of  Prussia  ;  for  the  boy  is  abundantly  smart, 
and  has  a  good  genius,  lie  will  likewise  put  into  your  Excellency's  hands 
a  Copy  of  the  genealogy  of  his  forefathers,  to  which  I  was  prompted  by  the 
pretensions  of  another,  as  you  will  see.:: 

About  a  year  ago,  at  the  particular  desire  of  the  Earl,  1  transmitted  to 
you  by  Post  a  Tree  of  the  Family  ;  and  I  would  be  glad  to  know  if  it  came 
safe  to  your  Excellency's  hands. 

I  heartily  wish  you  all  happiness  :  and  most  respectfully  am,  Sir. 
Your  Excellency's  most  obedient  humble  Servant, 

ROBERT  KEITH. 
Boimyhaugh,  near  Leith,  Oct.  (!,  17-")5. 


(Sir, — 1  am  infinitely  obliged  to  you  for  the  present  yoii  have  made  me 
of  the  Book,  but  much  more  so  for  that  of  your  nephew,  who  is  one  of  the 
prettiest  liveliest  boys  I  ever  saw,  and,  according  to  all  appearance,  will 
very  well  deserve,  and  perfectly  answer  the  best  education  I  can  give  him 
in  which  I  shall  spare  nothing  that  I  think  necessary  for  his  future  advance 
ment.  As  I  see  that  he  has  no  tincture  of  Latin,  I  think  it  now  too  late  to 
begin  him  to  it  :  and,  therefore,  shall  endeavour  to  make  up  that  luss  to  him 
by  the  living  languages.  French  and  German  he  will  learn  by  custom  here, 
where  these  two  are  equally  spoken,  and  I  shall  give  him  a  master  for 
Italian.  As  to  the  sciences,  Avhich  are  most  useful  to  one  designed  for  a 
military  life  (and  that  is  the  only  one  by  which  he  can  think  to  succeed  here), 
1  have  already  begun  to  make  !  teach  him  geography  and  drawing,  in  both 
which  he  makes  extraordinary  progress  :  and  in  a  short  time,  I  hope,  he  will 
be  in  a  condition  to  begin  a  course  of  geometry  and  fortification,  after  which 
he  shall  study  history,  but  more  particularly  modern,  from  about  the  time 
of  Charles  Y.  This  is  the  plan  I  have  laid  down  to  myself  for  his  education  ; 
for  the  which  I  have  still  four  years  (if  I  live  so  long)  before  his  age  permits 
him  to  enter  into  the  army.  As  yet  I  find  not  any  fault  in  his  natural 
disposition.  YVith  the  greatest  vivacity,  he  is  surprisingly  tractable  ;  and  I 
can  safely  say  I  never  saw  a  more  promising  boy.  But,  poor  child !  I  pity 


*  The  Genealogy  here  alluded  to  is  the  Controversial  Tract  noticed  in  a  former 
part  of  this  Memoir. 

|  A  French  manner  of  expression. 


EGBERT  KEITH.  271 

him,  since  my  age,  which  you  know  is  near  sixty,*  can  hardly  give  me  any 
reasonable  hope  of  seeing  him  far  enough  advanced  before  my  death  to  be 
able  to  push  his  fortune  afterwards.  But  you  may  depend  on  it  that,  both 
on  your  account  and  his  own,  I  shall  do  all  that  lies  in  my  power  for  his 
advantage. 

As  the  King  does  not  understand  English,  and  has  no  Books  of  that 
language  in  his  private  libraries,  I  have  put  the  one  addressed  to  him  in  the 
public  one  at  Berlin,  for  which  he  thanks  you  ;  and  the  other,  which  is 
designed  for  my  brother,  I  shall  send  to  him  to  Xeufchatel  by  the  first  sure 
occasion. 

As  I  have  been  always  persuaded  that  you  preserve  your  ancient  friend 
ship  for  me,  I  know  it  will  not  be  disagreeable  to  you  to  know  that,  after 
having  been  troubled  for  four  years  with  an  asthma,  I  am  now  perfectly 
cured  of  it,  by  the  waters  of  Carlsbad,  which  I  drank  last  summer,  and  am 
now  as  well  as  ever  I  was  in  my  life.  I  shall  always  be  glad  to  hear  of  the 
continuation  of  your  health  ;  for,  believe  me,  nobody  is  with  more  friendship 
and  regard.  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  Servant, 
Potsdam,  March  !•$.  17-">(>.  JAMES  KEITH. 

The  good  Bishop  appears  to  have  been  not  a  little  gratified 
by  the  attention  of  his  illustrious  Relative  and  ancient  Pupil,  the 
Field-Marshal.  We  accordingly  find  that,  in  the  course  of  the 
same  month  in  which  the  above  Reply  was  written,  he  addressed 
to  him  another  Epistle,  in  the  following  terms  :— 

May  it  please  your  Excellency, — I  am  honoured  with  your  extraordinary 
Favour  of  the  13th  instant ;  for  your  Excellency's  Letter  is  a  real  cordial  in 
my  old  age,  and  has  cheered  my  heart  not  a  little,  especially  as  it  brings  me 
the  refreshing  account  of  your  being  so  well  pleased  with  Bob  Keith,  who  is 
certainly  a  fine  boy,  and  is  happy  in  a  remarkable  sweetness  of  temper.  I 
am  much  pleased  with  the  plan  of  education  you  have  laid  down  for  him, 
and  do  most  sincerely  return  my  hearty  thanks  for  the  kind  reception  your 
Excellency  has  honoured  him  with,  and  for  that  remarkable  care  you  are 
pleased  to  take  of  him.  I  hope  you  shall  have  much  satisfaction  in  him, 
and  that  he  will  answer  all  your  expectations. 

In  a  late  Trial |  before  our  Court  of  Justiciary,  my  Book  was  called  for, 
and  plentiful  use  was  made  of  it  by  Lawyers  on  both  sides  ;  so  that  your 
Excellency's  Name  has  made  its  appearance  at  that  Bar.  I  am  particularly 
honoured  by  his  Majesty  of  Prussia  in  condescending  to  thank  me  for  a  Copy 
of  my  Book,  which  meets  with  approbation  from  the  Public,  particularly 


•'•  He  was  killed  in  Battle  in  17. "A  at  the  age  of  <i:> :  for,  by  an  Extract  from  the 
Baptism  liegister  of  St.  Fergus,  it  appears  that  M.  Keith  was  Baptixed  by  the  name 
of  James  Francis  Edward,  at  Invorugio.  the  principal  Seat  of  the  ancient  Family  of 
Marischal,  on  the  15th  June,  Ki'.Mi,  which  was  the  next  day  after  he  was  Born. 

f  The  Case  of  Mr.  Hugh  Mncdonald.  brother  to  the  Laird  of  Morar,  of  the  Clan- 
ranald  Family,  his  being  banished  forth  out  of  Scotland  for  being  a  Popish  Bishop. 
[See  Scots  Ufayaziiiefor  175(>,  />.  100.1 


272  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

among  the  Curious  ;  and  the  more  so  as  it  bears  your  Excellency's  Name, 
with  which  some  persons  are  particularly  delighted,  both  in  Scotland  and  in 
England. 

I  am  just  now  drinking,  in  a  glass  of  Claret,  all  health  and  happiness 
to  your  Excellency,  and  all  your  Connexions,  whom  may  God  long  preserve. 
I  am  entered  upon  the  70th  year  of  my  age,  and  am  obliged  to  use  the  hand 
of  another  in  writing  ;  but  I  thank  God  I  keep  health  surprisingly  well  for 
my  age,  though  I  am  much  failed  in  my  feet. 

I  am  much  plonked  that  your  Excellency  is  recovered  of  your  asthma; 
and  I  hope  you  shall  count  more  years  than  I  have  done  yet.  I  have  the 
honour  to  Subscribe  myself,  Sir, 

Your  Excellency's  very  much  obliged  and  most  humble  Servant, 

lior.TCfiT  KKITH. 
Bonnyhaugh,  near  Leith.  March  BO,  17-">(>. 

To  his  Excellency  Yelt-Marechal  Keith,  Berlin. 

P.S. — I  am  to  send,  in  a  present  to  your  Excellency,  a  Copy  of  my 
"  History  of  the  Affairs  of  Scotland,"  &c.,  put  up  in  a  box,  and  addressed  to 
the  care  of  Mr.  Stevens,  to  whom  it  sb;ill  he  sent  by  some  Hamburg  vessel. 
As  Bob  Keith  is  to  study  History,  it  will  not  be  amiss  that  he  should  look 
into  my  History,  especially  as  it  relates  to  the  Troubles  and  Distresses  of 
the  much-injured  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots.  Do  me  the  honour  to  let  me  know 
when  the  said  Copy  of  my  History  comes  to  your  Excellency's  hand;  for  I 
intend  to  dispatch  it  by  the  first  Ship  that  offers. — A  DIKU. 

This  Epistle  betrays,  no  doubt,  in  one  or  two  passages,  the 
garrulity  of  age,  as  well,  perhaps,  as  some  portion  of  that  inno 
cent  self-complacency  in  which  even  a  wise  man  may  indulge 
after  Dinner,  whilst  drinking  in  Claret  the  health  of  a  Noble 
Correspondent,  and  contemplating  the  rapid  increase  of  his  own 
Literary  fame. 

Dr.'  Michael  Russell,  in  1824,  Edited  Bishop  Keith's  Cata 
logue.  His  Researches  are  incorporated  here.  He  says  in  his 
Preface,- — "  All  the  materials  which  have  been  used  I  had  to 
seek  amidst  the  casual  notices  of  Literary  Journals  or  of  public 
Obituaries  ;  and  it  happened  in  this  case,  as  in  many  others,  that 
where  most  was  expected  least  was  obtained.  It  is  but  right, 
however,  to  observe,  that  the  amount  of  the  means  or  of  the 
labour  employed  in  antiquarian  research,  is  not  always  to  be 
measured  by  the  simple  effect  that  is  produced.  The  cramp  and 
interminable  Reading  in  which  such  pursuits  involve  the  most 
expert  Archaeologist,  may  be  compared  to  a  Voyage  of  Discovery 
in  unknown  seas,  where  the  toil  and  anxiety  are  equally  great 
whether  the  explorer  succeed  or  whether  he  fail  in  his  endeavours; 


EOBEET  KEITH.  273 

whether  he  make  a  valuable  addition  to  the  knowledge  of  his 
Contemporaries,  or  only  ascertain  that  there  is  nothing  to  be 
found.  Nearly  all  the  Notes  contained  in  the  Appendix,  the  most 
accomplished  Antiquary,  Lieutenant- General  Hutton,  supplied. 

"  My  thanks  are  due  to  William  Gordon  of  Fyvie,  Esq.,  for 
the  loan  of  a  valuable  Copy  of  Keith's  Catalogue,  now  in  his 
possession,  and  formerly,  as  I  have  understood,  the  property  of 
David  Macpherson,  the  Editor  of  Wi/iitouii's  Chronicle.  I  have 
a  similar  acknowledgment  to  make  to  Robert  Graham,  Esq.  of 
Eskbank,  for  his  polite  attention  in  allowing  me  to  peruse  the 
Notes  contained  in  his  Copy  of  the  same  Work,  and  inserted, 
as  it  would  seem,  by  the  Bishops  Alexander  and  Forbes.  I 
am  particularly  grateful  to  Patrick  Fraser  Tytler,  Esq.,  for 
his  goodness  in  sending  to  me,  unsolicited,  the  Copy  of  Keith 
which  belonged  to  his  father,  the  late  Lord  Woodhouselee,  and 
which  bears  ample  evidence  of  having  passed  through  the  hands 
of  so  able  a  Scholar  and  Antiquary." 

Bishop  Keith  in  the  Advertisement  to  the  Reader  of  his  Work, 
says  :— 

In  making  up  the  following  LIST  OF  BISHOPS,  I  was  greatly  assisted  by 
Papers  belonging  to  the  Family  of  PAXMURE,  which  I  received  from  a  late 
Noble  Eepresentative  of  that  Family,  reckoned  to  have  been  the  best  Anti 
quary  in  his  time. 

Another  person  to  whom  I  am  much  obliged,  is  the  Honourable  WALTER 
MACFARLAXE,  Chief  of  that  Name,  universally  acknowledged  to  be  the  first 
Antiquary  in  this  Kingdom.  The  Readers  will  easily  perceive  how  much  I 
owe  all  along  to  this  learned  and  knowing  Gentleman. 

A  third  person,  whose  assistance  I  gratefully  acknowledge,  is  Mr. 
WALTER  GOODALL,  in  the  Advocates'  Library,  particularly  for  his  acciirate 
Account  of  the  Culdees,  &c. 

"  .  .  .  It  adds  considerably  to  the  value  of  a  very  useful 
Book  to  know  that  Bishop  Keith  was  in  communication  with 
Father  Innes,  and  derived  from  his  information  and  Notes  much 
of  what  he  has  Published  in  his  History  of  the  Scotch  Bishops." 
[Preface  lij  Cosmo  Innes,  Reg.  Epis.  Glasguensis,  p.  yii."! 

"  Five  Vols.  of  Notes  of  Father  Innes,  are  now  in  the  pos 
session  of  Mr.  Laing,  Secretary  to  the  Bannatyne  Club ;  and  a 
careful  collation  of  them,  with  Keith's  Work,  has  left  no  doubt 
of  the  fact  above  stated.  Some  of  the  Documents  quoted  at 

VOL.  II.  2  M 


274  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

length  by  Keith  are  from  the  Records  of  Glasgow,  and  could 
only  be  obtained  from  the  Scots  College."  \Note  to  said  Preface.! 

"  In  reference  to  the  Catalogue  of  Scottish  Bishops,  which  was 
not  Published  till  eleven  years  after  the  Death  of  Inncs,  the 
Editor  of  the  Chartulary  of  the  Church  of  Glasgow  (Cosmo 
limes)  was  the  first,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  to  point  out  how 
much  Keith  was  indebted  to  his  learned  Countryman."  "Gnib'x 
Preface,  ]>.  xvii.,  (<>  June*'  Ciril  ami  Ecclesiastical  History  of  Scot 
land.  Printed  for  the  Spaldimj  Clith,  1853. 

As  I  conserve  every  written  Scrap  of  Ecclesiastical  News 
which  I  get  hold  of,  all  ready  for  seasonable  discharge,  unless 
a  ul  slijillo  coufessioiiis,  I  now  make  known  that  I  had  the  pleasure 
of  the  following  Correspondence,  among  others,  from  the  late 
Venerable  Thomas  Stephen,  Author  of  the  ''History  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland,"  "Book  of  the  Constitution,"  &c.,  and  who 
for  many  years  Edited  the  "  Episcopal  Magazine."  He  was  the 
son  of  the  Episcopal  Clergyman  at  Cruden,  Aberdeenshire,  and 
Died  this  year  in  his  daughter's  house,  2  Prince  of  Wales 
Terrace,  Scarborough,  aged  80  years. 

.  .  .  .  Your  Chronicle  and  Monasticon  for  Scotland  will  be  both 
useful  to  the  Church  and  interesting  to  the  Public  generally.  I  may  men 
tion  that  the  late  Rev.  Charles  Fyvie,  of  Inverness,  in  a  conversation  that  I 
had  with  him,  expressed  great  regret  that  Dr.  Russell  had  not  made  known 
his  intention  of  Re-publishing  Keith's  Catalogue,  as  he  could  have  supplied 
him  with  a  Quarto  Edition,  with  a  multitude  of  MS.  Notes  on  the  Margins, 
by  the  late  Bishop  M'Farlane,  his  father-in-law.  If  you  can  trace  his 
widow,  perhaps  that  Copy  might  be  recovered.  I  gave  some  Tracts,  both 
bound  and  loose,  to  Trinity  College,  Glenalmond,  chiefly  respecting  the 
Persecution  which  the  Church  sustained  at  and  after  the  Revolution.  I 
dare  say  Dr.  Hannay  would  lend  them  to  you  :  my  object  was  to  be  of  use 
to  future  Historians. 

In  my  time,  while  resident  in  Glasgow,  they  used  to  call  your  Church 
"  The  \Vhistlin'  Kirk,"  owing  to  the  Organ. 

You  have  given  me  no  Address,  but  I  suppose  you  will  be  Kc 


Mr.  Stephen's  Copy  of  "Keith"  (which  I  possess),  excepting 
one  or  two  corrected  Dates,  contains  nought  besides  the  Type. 

I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Fyvie,  now  in  her  dotage,  about  her  father's 
Copy  of  "  Keith,"  who  kindly  referred  me  to  Messrs.  George  and 
Peter  Anderson,  Writers,  Inverness,  who  are  known  Antiquaries, 
and  who  were  cognizant  about  the  fate  of  Dean  Fyvie  's  Books. 


ROBERT  KEITH.  275 

I  wrote  to  them  tlicrcanent,  but  no  manner  of  Reply  was  ever 
vouchsafed  ;  so  Bishop  M'Farlane's  Gatherings  must  find  an  alili. 
Bishop  Jolly  evidently  did  not  care  much  for  often  con 
sulting  Keith's  Catalogue,  as  his  Copy  is  very  clean.  On  the 
Top  of  the  Title  Page  is  inscribed— "  Alexander  Jolly.  The 
Gift  of  good  Bishop  Pctrie."  Probably,  being  a  Han  of  Peace, 
the  interminable  Battles  of  his  Brothers  of  Office — generally 
fiery,  plucky  Hen  of  War — frightened  him  from  opening  his 
"Keith,"'  in  case  of  explosive  mines. — Mr.  Andrew  Jervise, 
Brechin,  purchased  Bishop  Russell's  Copy  of  "Keith,"  and 
kindly  offered  to  me  its  perusal;  but  the  jottings  were  both  few 
and  unimportant. — Lord  Lindsay  most  courteously  allowed  me 
the  use  of  his '  Copy  of  "Keith,"  with  Riddle's  MS.  Notes, 
which  I  have  generally  embodied.  His  Lordship  has  engaged 
to  bequeath  the  Papers  and  Books  of  the  late  John  Riddle, 
Esq.,  Advocate,  to  the  Advocates'  Library,  Edinburgh. — Mr. 
Joseph  Irving,  Dumbarton,  has  now  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  John 
Lee's  Copy :  his  MS.  Remarks  have  also  been  cared  for.- — To 
the  Rev.  G.  Gr.  Milne  am  I  indebted  for  his  interleaved  Copy. 
—The  Rev.  Arthur  Ranken,  Deer,  kindly  allowed  me  the 
loan  of  his  Annotated  Copy,  which  chiefly  contains  a  List 
of  the  Episcopal  Clergy  at  the  Revolution,  opposite  the 
Parishes.  I  have  been  enabled  since  to  render  this  List 
nearly  complete,  and  also  to  give  the  "Ministers,  Exhorters, 
and  Readers"  immediately  after  the  Reformation,  downwards. — 
I  applied  in  October  1865  to  Mr.  John  Stuart,  of  the  General 
Register  Office,  Edinburgh,  for  his  valuable  aid ;  but  I  was 
disappointed  at  this  discomfiture — "  I  do  not  recollect  of  any 
jottings  which  I  could  give  you  suitable  for  Keith." 

Professor  Cosmo  Innes  courteously  indulged  me  with  the 
following  sane  counsel  and  permissive  Note  :— 

I  think  you  can  hardly  be  aware  what  a  work  you  propose  to  undertake 
in  a  new  Edition  of  "  Keith."  All  the  Authorities  of  the  Original  were  in 
MS.  These  are  all  now  Printed,  and  every  reference  should  he  verified. 
But  there  are  ten  times  more  than  Keith  knew,  all  now  accessible ;  and  our 
modern  taste  for  accuracy  requires  that  all  Charters,  Records,  and  Registers 
should  he  used  and  compared.  Do  you  think  you  have  strength  and  courage 
for  such  a  labour?  It  would  take  many  years.  It  requires  the  worker  to 


270  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

be  among  the  Records — that  is,  in  Edinburgh — for  a  long  time.  It  requires 
him  to  be  a  Record  Scholar,  familiar  with  llecords,  knowing  how  to  read 
them  and  to  draw  the  information  they  afford 

You  ask  me  if  I  find  any  defects  in  Russell's  Edition.  It  is  full  of 
them  ;  every  page  has  errors  and  deficiencies 

You  are  very  welcome  to  use  my  Prefaces  with  or  without  acknow 
ledgment.  C.  LNXES. 
In  Court,  10th  November,  180-1. 

I  have  also  received  the  following  Notanda  from  the  respec 
tive  Correspondents,  and  attended  to  their  suggestions  :— 

I  think  you  might  make  a  new  Edition  of  Keith's  Catalogue  very  inter 
esting.  All  that  Avas  thought  fit  or  proper  to  be  Published  of  my  father's 
Papers  is  given  in  Ncale's  Life.  I  have  a  good  many  Letters  Avhich  are 
interesting,  but  they  Avould  not  do  to  see  the  light  in  the  present  day.  I 
have  no  doubt  there  are  several  things  in  Milne's  interleaved  Copy  that  are 
valuable.  You  should  ask  him  to  lend  it  to  you,  as  he  is  an  old  friend.  .  . 
.  .  Why  not  imitate  Keith  in  giving  somewhat  of  the  origin  and  previous 
occupation  (where  Bishop  Russell  has  omitted  it)  of  the  Post-Revolution 
Bishops.  Altho  the  origin  of  some  of  them  Avas  low,  that  is  not  derogatory 
to  them  or  their  elevation,  but  rather  the  reA'erse.  "Wolsey,  the  greatest 
man  in  England  next  to  the  King,  Avas,  AVC  kuoAV,  the  son  of  a  butcher,  AA'ho 
AATote  his  name  I  Vu!>  ij.  J.  TOERY. 

St.  Aniie's,  Coupar-Angus,  Nov.  12,  18G-4. 


I  should  be  happy  to  give  assistance  in  your  projected  Work  on  the 
Scottish  Bishops,  but  I  never  Avas  in  the  Avay  of  making  Notes  upon  Keith, 
and  unless  it  Avcre  some  special  point,  I  haA'e  no  time  for  minute  investiga 
tions.     ...  D.  LAING. 
Signet  Library,  Edinburgh,  Dec.  29th,  1801. 


I  have  to  ask  your  indulgence  for  having  alloAved  your  Letter  to  lie  so 
long  unansAvercd.  It  came  I  think  on  a  Saturday,  AAThen  I  do  not  Avrite 
Letters  if  I  can  help  it ;  and  then  it  for  a  time  escaped  me. 

I  Avould  most  willingly  supply  to  you  any  information  AAThich  might  be 
useful  or  interesting  for  your  Work  IIOAV  in  progress,  if  I  kneAV  IIOAV.  I  haATe 
a  large  number  of  Letters  of  the  late  Primus,  but  I  have  never  examined 
them  Avith  a  A'iew  to  making  any  public  use  of  them ;  and  indeed  there  are 
among  them  not  a  feAV  Avhich  it  is  just  as  Avell  that  the  public  should  know 
nntliini/  (ili/ntt  '.  and  some  of  these  I  haA'e  thought  it  best  to  put  into  the  fire. 
Others  there  are  AA'hich  are  A*ery  interesting,  and  do  credit  to  the  Waiters ; 
but  I  do  not  know  that  they  contain  much  that  is  valuable  in  a  Historical 
point  of  AieAV. 

Should  I  find  a  little  more  leisure,  as  I  hope  I  may  after  Xmas,  I  will 
look  into  the  Old  Trunk  again  (my  house  is  so  small  that  I  haAre  been 
obliged  to  keep  them  in  a  trunk  in  a  loft),  or  if  I  find  anything  that  Avould 
interest  or,  more  especially,  do  f/ood,  I  will  send  it  you.  Perhaps  I  should 
succeed  better,  if  you  could  tell  me  to  what  Period,  and  to  which  of  our 
Bishops,  you  Avould  like  me  to  direct  my  attention.  The  Correspondence  is 


HUBERT  KEITH.  277 

mostly  confined  to  the  period  of  his  own  Episcopate  :  earlier  Documents 
you  will  iind,  I  presume,  in  the  Episcopal  Chest.  I  hear  Mrs.  Fyvie  is  not 
now  able  to  be  of  much  use  to  you.  Her  memory  is,  I  believe,  a  good  deal 
impaired.  I  return  her  Xote  as  you  desire. 

All  Saints,  Woodhead,  St.  Thomas,  1S6L  1).  WILSON. 

P.S. — You  are  getting  a  great  "luminary"  from  our  Parish  to  the  elite 
Presbyterians  of  Glasgow.  The  simple  folks  here  understand  that  he  is 
going  to  set  up  a  new  kind  of  Religion — something  between  the  Presbyterian 
and  the  Episcopalian  ways. 


I  am  glad  to  find  that  you  are  preparing  a  new  Edition  of  Keith's 
Bishops.  It  is  a  Work  which  admits  of  much  correction  and  enlargement, 
and  the  Clubs  have  by  their  Publications  provided  large  supplies  for  this 
purpose.  If  I  can  afford  you  any  assistance,  from  my  acquaintance  with 
Scotch  matters,  I  shall  be  very  happy  to  lend  my  humble  aid. 

I  may  mention  to  you  a  Work  which  lately  came  to  my  hand,  and  is 
a  Look  of  extreme  importance  towards  your  object,  namely,  "  Thciner's 
Vet  era  Monumenta  Hibernorum  ct  Scotorum  Historian!  illustrantia. 
Konuc,  1861.  Price,  Two  Guineas."  It  is  a  Eolio,  in  Double  Columns,  of 
624  closely-printed  Pages,  and  is  confined  to  the  Vatican  Records  connected 
with  Ireland  and  Scotland,  from  1216  to  1547.  It  is  a  Book  of  immense 
interest,  and  will  no  doubt  be  a  fountain  of  new  light  to  all  Writers  on  the 
History  of  the  two  Countries.  It  may  not  yet  have  found  its  way  to  Scot- 
laud  ;  but  it  is  to  be  had  at  Bernard  Kelly's,  Bookseller  in  Grafton  Street, 
Dublin.  For  your  purpose  it  is  of  extreme  value.  Documents  of  all  kinds 

- — Episcopal,   Monastic,   and  Culdean — occur   in  it You  are 

welcome  to  make  what  use  you  please  of  my  Culdce  Compilation. 

The  Library,  Armagh,  Jan.  25,  186o.  WM.  REEVES. 


It  is  a  great  pity  that  Theiuer's  Book  is  Edited  in  such  a  loose  and 
incorrect  manner,  as  it  greatly  impairs  the  reliance  which  one  can  place 
upon  his  renderings,  especially  in  names  of  men  and  places.  Still  it  is  a 
Work  of  value  for  our  Kingdoms. 

Wishing  you  every  success  in  your  most  important  Literary  under 
taking,  I  remain,  &c., 

The  Library,  Armagh,  Jan.  20,  1866.  WM.  REEVES. 


I  am  afraid  you  will  find  very  little  in  my  contributions  to  that  Work 
— ["  History  of  the  Upper  Ward  of  Lanarkshire"] — which  is  not  a  Compila 
tion  of  what  has  been  already  Printed.  I  recollect  that  I  noticed  one  of  the 
early  Douglasses,  who  was  Bishop  of  Moray,  gave  some  details  as  to  George 
Shoreswood,  who  was  first  Parson  of  Culter  and  afterwards  Bishop  of 
Brechiii  (I  quote  from  memory),  and  Chancellor  of  Scotland.  Indeed,  I 
suspect  that  myself  and  my  cousin,  Chancellor  of  Shieldhill,  derive  a  part  of 
our  blood  from  an  illegitimate  son  of  this  Bishop.  I  also  think  that  there 
are  some  passing  allusions  to  some  other  Bishops,  but  nothing  of  any 
importance. 

The  subject  of  the  Succession  of  the  Scottish  Bishops  appears  to  be  one 
which  at  present  excites  a  very  great  interest.  A  few  days  ago  the  Editor 


278  DIST1UCT  OF  FIFE. 

of  '•  Notes  and  Queries"  brought  me  an  Article  on  it  by  (of  all  persons!)  an 
Officer  in  India,  which  will  appear  in  the  Number  of  next  Saturday. 

I  am  at  present  engaged  in  Editing  the  most  extraordinary  Collection 
of  the  Duke  of  Lauderdalc's  Private  and  Public  Correspondence,  preserved 
in  the  British  Museum,  which  consists  of  about  50  Yols.,  many  of  them 
containing  400  MSS.  Among  them  are  many  of  the  returns  to  the  t'oin/f 
/r  clirx  of  our  Scotch  Bishops,  several  of  which  have  escaped  Keith's 
notice.  There  arc  also  most  numerous  Letters  relating  to  them.  E.>: 
i/ret/r,  to-day,  I  came  across  a  most  interesting  Petition  of  Anne,  Widow 
of  Walter  Whitefoord,  Prc-Piestoration  Bishop  of  Brcchin.  I  have  not 
yet  finally  arranged  as  to  the  Publishing  of  these  valuable  Documents  ; 
but  I  may  say  that  they  will  be  produced  in  a  very  cheap  form,  ranging 
with  Bohn's  Antiquarian  Library,  at  o.<  a  Volume.  I  cannot  under 
take  to  rccopy  for  you  the  Documents  connected  with  the  Bishops,  which 
arc  widely  scattered,  until  they  are  in  Type,  when  I  may  be  able,  as  the 
Work  goes  on,  to  let  you  have  the  Slip  Proofs  after  correction. 

GEORGE  VERE  IRVIXG. 

5  St.  Mark's  Crescent,  Piegent's  Park,  London,  N.W. 
5th  January,  18(55. 


.  .  .  .  I  have  begun  to  entertain  the  greatest  doubts  whether  the 
Trcr,  Bird,  and  'Fi*h  in  the  Arms  of  the  See  of  Glasgow  have  their  origin 
in  the  Legends  of  S.  Mungo  at  all ;  that  in  fact  they  refer  to  the  territorial 
rights  of  Free  Forestry  and  Fishing  belonging  to  the  Bishops.  1  am  well 
aware  that  the  Legend  occurs  in  Jocelinc  of  Furness,  before  Armorial 
Bearings  were  introduced  generally  in  Scotland ;  but  I  suspect  that  we  have 
here  an  instance  of  the  well  known  fallacy — /  Vs7  hoc,  )>ro],tei-  li<><\ 

17th  February,  1808.  GEORGE  VERE  IRVING. 


I  am  sorry  to  be  obliged  to  confess  a  profound  ignorance  of  Keith.  I 
have,  it  is  true,  more  than  once  looked  into  it,  and  been  awed  by  its  extreme 
dryncss,  and  dismissed  it  from  my  imagination.  If  you  can  enliven  it,  we 
shall  have  reason  to  be  grateful  to  you. 

I  was  not  Editor  of  the  "  S.  E.  J."  in  '51,  and  can  therefore  furnish  no 
better  clue  to  the  Correspondent  whose  name  you  seek —  [in  regard  to  Bishop 
Forbes'  Journal]  — than  to  refer  you  to  Mr.  Walker  of  Bowland,  then  Editor. 

I  understand  Mr.  Grub  is  engaged  in  the  same  Literary  undertaking. 
It  will  go  hard  with  the  sale,  if  the  two  Editions  come  forward  at  the  same 
time,  and  the  public  will  be  disappointed  that  the  labours  of  the  two  parties 
were  not  combined.  ...  H.  G.  W.  AUBREY. 

Parsonage,  Galashiels,  Dec.  2,  1864. 


I  am  afraid  I  am  in  the  same  position  as  Mr.  Robertson,  and  that  I 
shall  not  be  able  to  give  you  any  aid  in  your  Literary  work.  So  far  as 
Names  and  Dates  go,  you  will  find  very  full  and,  I  think,  accurate  informa 
tion  in  my  History.  .  .  .  You  are  misinformed  about  my  Editing 
Keith.  .  .  .  GEORGE  GRUB. 

Aberdeen,  22nd  Dec.,  1864. 


ROBERT  KEITH.  279 

I  can  tell  you  where  you  are  most  likely  to  get  information  regarding 
Bp.  Petrie,  if  any  exist,  and  that  is  from  Mr.  Cheyne.  He,  more  than  any 
man  I  know,  is  well  acquainted  with  the  minute  details  of  the  History  of  the 
Church  and  of  her  more  remarkable  Clergy  since  the  Revolution,  especially 
in  the  Aberdeen  Diocese.  I  have  no  doubt  he  will  be  able  also  to  tell  you 
something  about  Blairdaff  and  Auchindoir. 

I  had  never  understood  that  Mr.  Grieve  had  been  a  pupil  of  Bishop 
Petrie.  At  any  rate,  I  very  seldom  heard  him  speak  of  him,  and  I  have 
come  upon  no  Papers  which  would  throw  any  light  on  his  History. 

St.  Marv's,  Inverurv,  18th  Nov.,  180-1.  ALEX.  HARPER. 


1  should  have  been  very  happy  to  have  helped  you  in  your  interesting 
task,  but  I  am  now  in  very  indifferent  health,  and  unable  to  get  through  my 
own  work.  Besides,  History  has  never  been  my  line,  and  I  am  utterly 
ignorant  of  the  lately  Printed  Cartularies  and  other  Original  Documents, 
which,  I  believe,  have  thrown  much  light  On  Scotch  History. 

I  should  think  it  must  be  a  very  difficult  task  to  give  a' faithful  Account 
of  recent  events,  and  that  it  would  be  better  to  leave  out  at  least  the  last  30 
years.  Have  you  applied  to  Mr.  Bell  of  West  Lint  on  '?  I  know  few  persons 
better  acquainted  with  the  History  of  our  Scotch  Church.  .  .  .  Can  you 
give  me  any  information  about  old  Copies  of  the  Scotch  Communion  Office, 
and  whether  Bishop  Abcrnethy  Drummond's  Edition  was  used  in  Glasgow? 
Burntisland,  4th  May,  1865.  G.  H.  FORBES. 


•  •  •  •  I  think  you  would  find  it  worth  while  to  spend  a  day  or  two 
amongst  the  MSS.  in  the  Episcopal  Library.  Scarcely  any  one  goes  there. 
The  front  gate  of  S.  Andrew's  Hall,  in  Leith  Wynd,  is  now  locked,  and  the 
windows  all  boarded  up  :  but  there  is  an  entry  through  one  of  the  closes  (I 
think  it  is  called  Trunk  Close)  by  which  you  can  gain  admittance  when  you 
have  found  the  way.  Your  best  plan  would  be  to  write  M'Lachlan  a  Note, 
and  ask  him  to  meet  you.  or  send  the  key  of  the  room.  His  address  is 
"  Glenalmond  Cottage,  Sciennes  Hill."  'Bishop  Forbes'  (of  Caithness) 
Journal  is  very  interesting,  and  might  be  inserted  in  your  Book.  ... 
West  Linton,  Edinburgh,  May  22,  18C55.  WALTER  BELL. 


I  am  delighted  to  know  that  you  are  grappling  with  Keith.  The  time 
has  long  come  for  a  better  Edition  than  it  was  possible  for  Dr.  Russell  to 
turn  out.  You  have  equal  knowledge  of  the  subject,  a  greater  wealth  of 
materials  at  command,  and,  above  all,  the  proper  enthusiasm. 

I  fear  you  have  heard  an  exaggerated  account  of  my  stores.  I  have 
noted  down  occasionally  for  many  years,  in  the  margins  of  my  Copy,  such 
•notalilia  as  chanced  to  come  across  me  in  the  course  of  my  reading.  I 
shall  be  delighted  to  transmit  to  you,  from  time  to  time,  whatever  occurs  to 
me  as  likely  to  be  useful.  Xo  doubt,  you  have  already  put  yourself  in  com 
munication  with  our  Historian,  Dr.  George  Grub ;  and,  above  all,  with  Dr. 
Joseph  Robertson,  Mr.  Cosmo  Innes,  Mr.  John  Stuart,  &c.  You  might  also 
enlist  Mr.  Cheyne,  who  used  to  have  stores  of  information  on  these  subjects. 
The  Episcopal  Chest,  too,  at  Glenalmond,  is  fuller  and  richer  than  it  was 
when  the  last  Edition  of  Keith  came  out. 


280  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

If  you  mean  to  write  a  History  of  the  present  Bishops,  you  will  have 
some  queer  Stories  to  tell ;  but  you  are  the  very  man  to  bring  out  of  your 
treasures  things  new  and  old. 

Aberdeen,  July  3,  1805.  II.  I). 

From  a  casual  notice,  contained  in  a  Letter  addressed  to 
Bishop  Rait,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  Bishop  Keith 
Published,  about  the  year  1743,  some  "  Select  Pieces  of  Thomas 
a  Keinpis,"  Translated  into  English.  In  his  Preface  to  the 
Second  Volume  of  these  Pieces,  he  has  introduced  some  Ad 
dresses  to  the  Virgin  Mary ;  for  which  imprudence  (as  it  was 
deemed  in  those  evil  days  of  calumny  and  reproach)  he  thought 
it  necessary  to  enter  into  some  explanation  with  his  more  scrupu 
lous  Brethren. 

Grub,  in  his  "Ecclesiastical  History  of  Scotland,"  vol.  iv., 
p.  47,  Note,  says  :— 

This  is  substantially  correct,  though  the  circumstances  are  inaccurately 
related  by  Dr.  Russell  and  Mr.  Lawson.  In  1721,  there  was  Published  at 
Edinburgh  the  Second  Volume  of  "  Select  Pieces  of  the  Reverend  and  Pious 
Thomas  a  Kempis,  in  which  are  contained  two  Books,  viz.,  I.  The  Valley  of 
Lilies;  II.  The  Soliloquy  of  the  Soul."  In  the  Preface  by  "the  Publisher 
to  the  English  Reader,"  which  undoubtedly  was  written  by  Keith  while  a 
Presbyter  in  Edinburgh,  it  is  stated  that  the  Addresses  to  the  Blessed  Virgin 
are  omitted,  "  as  being  most  stumbling  to  the  generality  of  English 
Readers."  In  some  places,  however,  passages  occur  as  objectionable  as 
direct  Addresses  to  the  Virgin.  And  for  this  Bishop  Keith  afterwards 
apologized  in  a  Letter  written  by  him  to  Bishop  Rait,  Dated  19th  October, 
1743,  a  Copy  of  which  is  among  the  Papers  of  the  Episcopal  Church  in 
Scotland.  [See  20  of  Xo.  7  in  the  Catalogue.  Scotichronicon,  f>J.  ii.,  j>.  204.] 

Keith,  while  a  Student  at  Aberdeen,  at  the  request  of  Dr.  George 
Garden,  Translated  into  Latin  the  last  seven  years  of  Dr.  John  Forbes' 
Diary,  for  the  Amsterdam  Edition  of  the  Works  of  that  Divine. 

Besides  the  Works  we  have  mentioned,  it  appears  that  the 
Bishop  had  at  least  projected  others  at  an  advanced  period  of  his 
life.  There  was  found  among  his  Posthumous  Manuscripts,  a 
"Treatise  on  Mystical  Divinity,"  drawn  up  in  the  form  of 
"Letters  addressed  to  a  Lady,"  as  also  a  "  Scheme  of  Religion 
derived  solely  from  the  Scriptures,"  and  intended,  it  was  thought, 
for  the  use  of  his  own  Family.  This  statement  is  given  on  the 
authority  of  Bishop  Alexander  of  Alloa,  who  appears  to  have 
consulted  Mrs.  Keith  after  the  Death  of  her  husband,  and  even 


ROBERT  KEITH.  281 

to  have  inspected  all  the  Literary  Papers  committed  to  her 
custody.  Bishop  Alexander  made  this  enquiry  in  order  to  answer 
a  question  put  to  him  by  an  "English  Clergyman,"  who  was 
desirous  to  know  whether  Bishop  Keith  "had  left  any  Posthu 
mous  Works  behind  him." 

Nor  does  it  appear  that  he  confined  his  attention  to  History 
and  Divinity.  He  was  a  lover  of  Archaeology  in  all  its  branches. 
The  two  following  Letters,  which  are  Copied  from  the  Originals 
preserved  in  Marischal  College,  Aberdeen,  will  show  that  he  had 
directed  his  thoughts  with  much  success  to  "the  study  of  our 
Ancient  Coins,  and  to  the  progressive  improvement  of  the  Euro 
pean  Mint":— 

Dear  Sir, — Two  or  three  weeks  ago,  I  desired  our  brother,  Mr  Alex 
ander,  to  deliver  the  Silver  Penny  I  formerly  mentioned  to  a  gentleman  of 
your  Town,  that  he  might  put  it  into  your  hands,  with  orders  for  you  to 
retain  it  in  your  custody  till  I  should  write  you,  which  I  hope  the  gentleman 
has  honestly  done.  The  Penny,  you  see,  is  very  fair  and  entire.  The 
Inscription  on  the  King's  side,  "David  Dei  Gra.  Rex  Scotorum  ;"  the 
Legend  on  the  Reverse,  "Dns.  P.tector  ms.  et  Lib.ator  rns.,"  which  you 
know  is  for  "  Dominus  Protector  meus  et  Liberator  meus  ;"  and  within 'the 
inner  circle,  "  Villa  Aberdon."  Now,  this  Penny  I  ask  the  favour  of  you  to 
present  from  me  to  the  Library  of  the  Marischal  College,  in  testimony  of 
my  having  been  some  time  a  Student  there. 

And  I  ask  the  same  favour,  Sir,  with  respect  to  this  old  Draught  of  the 
two  Cities,  and  Aijcr  Alerdoneii.  The  Author  of  it  is  well  known  by  his 
other  performances  of  this  same  kind ;  and  as  I  never  chanced  to  see 
another  Copy  of  this,  and  it  has  evidently  been  a  Copy  that  has  been  sent 
from  Holland  to  receive  the  corrections  of  the  Author,  which  we  discern 
upon  it,  all  written  with  his  own  hand,  he  probably  has  chanced  to  die  in 
the  meantime,  and  so  the  Design  has  not  been  followed  forth,  otherwise  'tis 
impossible  but  some  Copies  would  appear.  But  as  none  that  I  know  of 
have  been  seen,  this  I  hope  will  render  it  the  more  acceptable  in  the  fore- 
mentioned  Repository.  With  my  kind  service  to  yourself  and  the  gentlemen 
of  the  Marischal  College,  I  remain,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  humble  Servant, 
Edinburgh,  April  7,  1750.  ROBERT  KEITH. 

To  the  Right  Rev.  Mr.  Andrew  Gerard,  Aberdeen. 


Sir, — I  received  your  Letter  of  the  18th,  containing  thanks  from  your 
self  and  the  Society  you  represent  for  the  Silver  Coins,  &c.,  deposited  in 
your  Marischal  College  by  me  and  two  of  my  Brethren.  As  several  of  these 
Coins  are  already  become,  through  length  of  time,  exceeding  rare,  and 
seldom  to  be  seen  at  all,  and  the  rest  will  come  to  be  so  in  a  proportionable 
run  of  time,  we  thought  it  was  doing  some  service  to  our  native  Country  to 
deposit  those  few  in  our  Ahna  Mater,  for  the  satisfaction  of  curious  persons 

VOL.  II.  2  N 


282  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

after  we  shall  be  dead  and  gone ;  and  we  are  pleased  enough  that  your 
Society  has  put  a  mark  of  esteem  on  them,  as  to  take  all  possible  precaution 
to  preserving  them  from  being  lost  or  dissipated.  How  coarsely  soever  our 
Scottish  Coins  may  appear  to  have  been  wrought,  yet  I  think  I  can  assure 
you  that,  by  inspecting  those  of  the  neighbouring  Nations  at  the  different 
Periods,  our  own  are  not  much  inferior. 

I  return  you,  Sir,  my  personal  thanks  for  your  polite  Letter,  and  for 
having  been  pleased  to  impart  to  me  the  alteration  you  have  already  made 
in  the  fabric  of  the  College,  which  I  remember  very  well  how  it  formerly 
stood  ;  and  the  alteration  you  are  intending  to  make  in  the  future  Education 
of  your  Students.  I  thank  you  also  for  a  Letter  you  gave  me  about  a  year 
and  a  half  ago,  to  which  I  was  diverted  from  giving  a  Return  at  the  time  by 
some  incidents,  and  beg  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  receive  this  excuse  now, 
from.  Sir,  Your  most  humble  and  obliged  Servant, 

Edinburgh,  28th  Nov.,  1752.  ROBERT  KEITH. 

To  Principal  T.  Blackwell,  Mar.  Col. 

When  the  great  Douglas  Cause  was  being  litigated,  the 
following  interesting  Certificate  of  Marriage  was  produced  by 
Lady  Stewart  :— 

I,  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  Minister  of  the  Gospel,  do  hereby  declare  that  on 
the  4th  day  of  the  month  of  August,  1740,  I  Married  the  two  following 
persons  together  as  Man  and  Wife,  according  to  the  Lethurgy  [*/>]  of  the 
Church  of  England,  viz.,  John  Stewart,  Esq.,  brother-german  to  Sir  George 
Stewart  of  Grandtully,  and  the  Lady  Jane  Douglas,  sister  lawful  to  Archi 
bald,  the  present  Duke  of  Douglas.  In  testimony  of  which,  I  have  written 
this  Declaration,  with  my  own  hand,  at  Edinburgh,  and  have  Subscribed 
the  same  in  presence  of  Archibald  Bothwell,  Esq.,  Master  of  the  Mint  in 
Scotland,  and  the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Alexander,  residing  in  Alloa,  this 
19th  day  of  February,  1752  years. 

ROBERT  KEITH. 
A.  Bothwell,  ir//»c.s-,v. 
John  Alexander,  ir/'/m.s.s-. 

The  Bishop  Married  a  Lady  named  Stewart,  by  whom  he  had 
only  one  child,  a  daughter,  named  Clementina  Stewartina,  who 
married  Mr.  Carmichael  of  Leitli.  The  offspring  of  this  Marriage 
was  also  a  daughter,  who  became  the  first  wife  of  Mr.  Douglas, 
Merchant  in  Leitli.  Several  children  were  the  issue  of  this 
Marriage,  one  of  whom — SteAvart  Douglas,  Esq.,  also  Merchant 
in  Leith — was  the  father  of  the  Rev.  Archibald  Douglas,  who  was 
Curate  to  the  Venerable  Dr.  Bayley,  Archdeacon  of  Stow,  in  the 
Diocese  of  Lincoln,  at  the  Date  of  that  gentleman's  Death  in 
August,  1844,  and  who  is  the  great-great-grandson  of  Bishop 
Keith.  \Laicson,  from  Information  l>y  Bishop  Russell.] 


ROBE11T  KEITH.  288 


Will  and  Settlement  oj  r>is?i»p  Keith,  licijinlcr 

Edinburgh. 

21st  April,  1757. — Walter  Lord  Torpliiclicu,  Judge  ;  John  Gibson,  Pro 
curator  ;  John  Thomson,  Writer  in  Edinburgh,  gave  in  the  Disposition  and 
Assignation  aftonvrittcn  to  be  registered,  whereof  the  tenor  follows  : — 

I,  Mr.  Piobcrt  Keith,  Minister  of  the  Gospel  at  Edinburgh,  considering 
that  by  the  Marriage  Settlement,  Dated  the  day  of  last, 

betwixt  Stewart  Carmichael,  Merchant  in  Edinburgh,  and  Catharine  Keith, 
my  only  daughter,  I  have  provided  the  said  Catharine  Keith  with  a  suitable 
provision,  and  stand  bound  to  pay  the  same  to  the  said  Stewart  Carmichael, 
at  the  terms  therein  mentioned :  And  also  considering  that  Isobell  Cameron, 
my  beloved  spouse,  is  nowise  provided  for  by  me  in  the  event  of  my  Decease  : 
therefore,  and  for  the  love,  favour,  and  affection  which  I  have  and  bear  to 
her,  the  said  Isobell  Cameron,  I  hereby,  with  and  under  the  Burden,  Pro 
vision,  and  [Reservation  aftermcntioned,  Assign,  Convey,  and  Make  over  to 
and  in  favour  of  her  and  her  Heirs  and  Assignees,  whatsoever  all  and  sundry 
Debts  and  Sums  of  Money,  Principal  Interest,  and  Penalties  due  and  ad- 
debted  to  me,  or  which  shall  be  due  and  addebted  to  me  by  Bond,  Bill, 
Promise,  Faction,  Accompt,  or  otherwise  any  manner  of  way,  by  person  or 
persons,  together  with  the  said  Bonds,  Bills,  Accompts,  or  other  Vouchers, 
and  all  Actions,  Instance,  and  Execution  competent  thereon ;  as  also  all 
Gold  and  Money  (coined  and  uncoined),  Medalls,  Books,  Pictures,  House 
hold  Furniture  of  all  kinds,  and  all  Goods  and  Gear  whatever,  of  any 
kind  or  denomination,  presently  belonging  to  me,  or  which  are  in  my 
custody,  or  which  shall  belong  to  me  or  be  in  my  custody  at  the  time  of  my 
Death,  dispensing  with  the  generality  hereof,  and  declaring,  That  these 
Presents  shall  be  as  effectual  to  my  said  spouse  as  if  every  particular  sum 
and  subject  had  been  herein  specially  named.  And  for  rendering  this  my 
Assignation  more  effectual,  I  hereby  Nominate  and  Appoint  the  said  Isobell 
Cameron  my  Sole  Executor  and  Universal  Lcgator,  with  full  power  to  her, 
immediately  after  my  Decease,  to  meddle  and  intromitt  with,  sell,  use, 
uplift,  and  discharge  the  same  and  subjects  before  conveyed,  and,  if  needful, 
to  obtain  herself  Dccerned  and  Confirmed  Executor  foresaid  to  me  before  the 
proper  Commissaries,  and  to  do  every  other  thing  anent  the  Premises  that 
shall  be  thought  proper  for  making  the  said  subjects  effectual  to  her  :  Pro 
vided  always,  as  it  is  hereby  expressly  Provided  and  Declared,  That  the  said 
Isobell  Cameron  shall  be  bounded  and  obliged  to  content  and  pay  the  whole 
just  and  lawful  Debts  that  shall  be  resting  and  owing  by  me  at  the  time  of 
my  Decease,  to  whatever  person  or  persons,  and  the  Expenses  of  my  Funeral ; 
and  reserving  also  to  me  not  only  my  liferent  of  the  foresaid  Sums  and 
Subjects  during  all  the  days  of  my  lifetime,  but  also  full  poAver  and  liberty 
to  use  the  same  as  I  shall  think  proper,  without  the  advice  or  consent  of  my 
said  spouse,  and  to  alter  these  Presents,  in  whole  or  in  part,  as  to  me  shall 
seem  meet :  But  declaring,  if  I  make  no  alterations  by  an  express  Writing 
under  my  hand,  that  then,  and  in  that  case,  these  Presents,  tlio  found  in  my 
custody  or  of  any  other  person  at  my  Death,  shall  be  valid  and  effectual  to 
my  said  spouse  as  if  the  same  had  been  delivered  by  me  to  her  in  my  own 
lifetime  ;  and  with  the  not-delivery  qrof  I  hereby  dispense  and  consent  to  the 
Registration  hereof  in  the  Books  of  Council  and  Session,  or  of  any  other 
proper  Court,  therein  to  remain  for  preservation ;  and  for  that  effect  I  con- 


281  DISTKICT  OF  FIFE. 

stitute  Jo.  Gibson  my  Procurator.  In  Witness  whereof,  these  Presents, 
written  on  this  and  the  preceding  page  of  Stampt  Paper  by  Andrew  Buck- 
ney,  Clerk  to  James  Kobertson  Barclay,  Clerk  to  the  Signet,  are  Subscribed 
by  me  at  Bonytouu,  the  Twenty-fifth  Day  of  November,  Jaivij  and  Fifty  two 
Years,  before  these  Witnesses,  John  Mitchclson,  Writer  in  Edinr,  and  the 
said  Andrew  Buckney. 

(Signed)  ROBERT  KEITH. 

John  Mitchelsou,  Wiinc.™. 
Andrew  Buckney,  U7/m'.s.v. 

It  lias  been  already  stated  that  the  Bishop  passed  several  of 
the  last  years  of  his  life  at  his  Villa  of  Bonnyhangli — a  retired 
and  pleasant  situation  on  the  banks  of  the  Water  of  Leith. 
There 'he  enjoyed  the  society  of  his  daughter's  family,  which  was 
settled  in  that  neighbourhood,  diverted  the  languor  of  old  age  by 
Study  and  Religious  Meditation,  and  prepared  his  mind  and  his 
household  for  that  important  change,  for  which  it  had  been  the 
business  of  his  life  to  prepare  others.  He  Died  at  Bonny haugh 
on  the  20th  January,  1757,  between  seven  and  eight  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  in  the  7Gth  year  of  his  age.  He  was  confined  to 
bed  only  one  day  before  his  Death — the  only  day  that  he  had 
been  so  confined  during  G4  years,  though  he  had,  as  long  as  he 
lived  in  Edinburgh,  been  constantly  afflicted  with  a  nervous 
headache.  He  was  Interred  in  the  Canongate  Churchyard,  and 
the  spot  where  his  Remains  are  deposited  is  indicated  by  a 
simple  square  Pedestal  about  4  feet  in  height,  surmounted  by 
an  Urn,  near  the  South-west  corner  of  the  ground,  and  is  thus 
Inscribed  :— 

Bishop  Keith  died 

1750. :: 

Stewartiua,  Catharina, 
Carmichael,  Wife  of 

William  Douglas, 
died  20th  April,  1793. 

William  Douglas, 

Merch*.  m  Leith,  died  llth 

July,  1814. 

:':  Tliis  Date  is  evidently  wrong,  as  it  was  in  the  beginning  of  1757  that  he  Died. 


irr  WHITE.  285 


LVI.  EGBERT  WHITE,     A.D.  1743-61,    (No  Seal) 

Had  the  charge  of  the  Flock  in  Cupar-Fifc  until  his  Death 
on  the  16th  August,  1761.  In  common  with  the  other  "Epis 
copal  Chapels"  at  the  time,  his  was  visited  at  the  "'45"  by  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland.  The  Mob  kicked  and  burned  in  the  streets 
the  Altar,  Service  Books,  Pulpit,  Seats,  &c.,  amid  oaths  and 
ribald  jokes.  He  was  Consecrated  in  the  "Meeting  House"  of 
the  Rev.  David  Guthrie,  at  Carsebank,  about  a  mile  to  the  east 
ward  of  Forfar,  upon  Tuesday  the  24th  June,  1735  —  being  the 
Festival  of  the  Nativity  of  S.  John  the  Baptist  —  and  succeeded 
Bishop  Gillan  as  Bishop  of  Dunblane.  Upon  Bishop  Keith's 
Resignation  of  the  "District  of  Fife,"  the  Clergy  therein  Elected 
him  as  their  "Ordinary,"  on  the  26th  October,  1743;  and  he 
Resigned  the  oversight  of  Dunblane,  24th  January,  1744.  When 
Bishop  Keith  Died,  the  Episcopal  College  consisted  of  Bishops 
White,  William  Falconar,  Raitt,  Alexander,  and  Gerard.  White 
succeeded  as  Primus  in  1757. 

It  appears  to  have  been  an  understood  arrangement  among 
the  Prelates,  that  whoever  they  Elected  Primus  should  ex  ojjicio 
become  JJishop  of  Edinburgh  —  which  accounts  for  that  Diocese 
being  kept  for  so  many  years  without  a  Bishop,  or,  as  the  Clergy 
reasonably  murmured,  in  a  "state  of  orphancy."  The  Edin 
burgh  Clergy  in  1759  Elected  the  Rev.  Alexander  Robertson  as 
their  interim  Bishop,  and  sent  the  Deed  of  Election  to  Bishop 
White,  who,  after  four  months'  silence,  wTrote  an  angry  Letter 
to  Mr.  Robertson,  objecting  against  his  Election.  Bishop  White 
stood  upon  his  Office  of  Primus,  and  considered  himself  the 
immediate  Ordinary  of  Edinburgh.  The  College  of  Bishops 
supported  his  view,  and  refused  to  Confirm  the  Election.  [MS. 
Memoirs  of  the  Episcopal  Church  of  Scotland.] 

A  lengthy  Epistle,  written  by  Bishop  White  to  his  Corres 
pondent,  the  Rev.  David  Lindsay,  at  Dunning,  on  Latitudinarian- 
ism  and  Schism,  appeared  in  Stephen's  "Episcopal  Magazine," 
December  1835,  vol.  hi.,  pp.  358-361  ;  as  also  in  his  "History 
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,"  vol.  iv.,  pp.  373-376.  The  Original 
was  in  the  possession  of  Bishop  Low  at  Pittenweem. 


286  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Xiuiibi'r  11  ///  i /tc  C.'iilnlnr/itc. 

7.  (Holograph)  Letter  of  Thanks  in  name  of  Mr.  Raitt's  friends,  Mr. 
Charles  White  to  Mr.  Robert  Keith,  Aprilc  18,  1727,  for  his  good  offices,  &c. 

10.  Two  Originals,  March  18,  1735,  Presbyters  of  Dunblane,  then- 
Address  or  Letter  to  all  the  Bishops,  requesting  to  appoint  a  Bishop  over 
them.  Herein  are  deposited  Letters,  Originals,  and  Copies  of  all  the 
Bishops  to  one  another,  relative  to  ye  Consecration  of  Bishop  White,  at 

20.  (Copy)  In  the  Handwriting  of  Bishop  White,  Collation  of  Mr. 
David  Lindsay  to  St.  Andrews,  Jaury.  2.  1712. 

80.  Extract  of  the  Deed  of  Election,  Octor.  20,  17-13,  Presbyters  of 
Fife  for  Bishop  Robert  White. 

31.  (Copy)  Bishop  White's  Letter  of  Acceptance,  Novr.  5,  17-13. 

32.  (Holograph)  Bishop  White's  Resignation  of  Dunblane,  Jan.  21, 17-14. 

The  following  Letters  are  copied  from  the  Originals,  and  were 
never  Printed  until  now  :— 

I. — From.  ]}txfto/>  I!  /lift:  lu  tin'  lii/jht  Her.  Dr.  T/tonum  Jliittrai/  of'  (.'raii/hall. 

R.  R.  D.  Sir, — Your  obliging  Lr  of  the  18  Deer,  came  to  my  hand  on 
Sunday  last.  When  I  ask'd  your  fi'riendship  for  procuring  a  Bursary  from 
Sir  Al.  Ramsey  to  my  son,  as  I  wanted  your  advice  how  to  apply  him,  so  I 
was  resolved  to  follow  it ;  and  you  may  be  sure  what  you  think  will  be  most 
effectual  will  be  most  acceptable  to  me.  What  made  me  propose  ad 
dressing  him  soon,  was  that  there  might  be  a  vacancy  next  Term  of  present 
ing,  and  others  might  be  beforehand  with  me  for  it.  But  'tis  equal  to  me,  if 
it  can  be  procured  so  as  to  commence  the  Term  after  that — this  being  only 
my  son's  3d  year  at  the  College  ;  and  I  can  let  him  stay  out  his  full  Course 
or  not,  as  the  grant  of  Sir  Alexander's  flavour  requires.  You  propose  the 
thing  I  wished  for — your  personal  application  :  the  making  of  which  I  leave 
to  your  convcnicncy,  and  hope  there  shall  be  no  danger  in  delaying  for  the 
time  you  mention. 

It  pleases  me  that  your  thoughts  of  Mr.  Conachar's  affair  jumps  so 
with  mine.  When  I  sent  Mr.  Bell  the  Suspension  to  be  executed,  I  desired 
him  to  Officiate  in  his  Meeting:IIouse  some  Sunday  after  the  execution,  and 
suggested  to  him  that  he  should  influence  his  people  to  address  for  taking 
oft'  the  Sentence,  and  that  Mr  C-  — r  should  come  to  me  with  that  in  his 
pocket,  and  then  I  should  consider  of  relaxing  him.  I  wrote  nothing  of  this 
to  Mr.  K.  or  you,  having  left  it  open  (this  notwithstanding)  to  follow  your 
advice  as  to  continuing  or  taking  off  the  Suspension  ;  and  I  required  Mr. 
Bell  to  act  this  as  of  himself,  and  not  let  my  name  be  heard  in  it.  I  know 
not  what  to  think  of  my  not  hearing  of  this  since  I  sent  up  the  Suspension, 
the  middle  of  Novr. ;  but  begin  to  think  Mr.  Bell  has  put  off  the  execution 
till  the  Christmass  Ffestival  should  be  over.  At  the  same  time,  I  desired 
Mr.  Bell  to  make  enquiry  if  there's  any  hazard  of  a  criminal  pursute. 

I  bless  God  I  have  my  health  as  wTell  as  ever,  have  recovered  my 
strength,  and  very  near  (I  think)  my  lost  fflesh,  and  find  no  odds  but  that 
the  cold  weather  makes  some  more  impression  on  me  than  it  had  wont, 
which  obliges  me  to  guard  better  against  it.  This  I  impute  to  being  so 


EOBEET  WHITE.  2R7 

long  coiifin'cl  to  a  warm  room.  I  return  my  hearty  thanks  for  your  concern 
both  for  my  person  and  interest ;  and  praying  God  this  may  be  a  happy 
year  to  you  and  ffamily,  and  that  He  may  long  preserve  you  to  us  for  the 
good  of  His  Church,  I  am, 

E.  II.  J).  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Servant, 
Cupar,  Jan.  2d,  1730.  Eon.  WHITE. 

II. — To  tlic  llii/Jit  Her.  7V.  Tliui/nis  litittrni/  <>f  Cnt'ujhaU. 

E.  E.  D.  Sir, — Having  the  occasion  of  one  going  for  Perth,  I  reckon  an 
Ace*  of  Mr.  Conachar's  affair,  as  it  now  stands,  will  not  be  unacceptable  to 
you.  K.  wrote  me  on  the  5th  of  this,  of  a  complaining  Lr  he  had  from  him, 
and  extenuating  his  ffault,  intimating  that  the  most  part  of  his  retainers 
being  within  ye  Diocese  of  Glasgow,  he  might  disregard  my  Sentence,  and 
continue  w1  them  under  the  inspection  of  F.  But  that  he  would  not  move 
a  step  without  K.'s  advice,  which  it  seems  allarm'd  him  (as  it  would  not 
have  done  me),  and  occasioned  my  getting  a  longer  I/  than  ordinary,  urging 
me  (but  modestly)  to  remit  the  Sentence.  Tis  ten  to  one  but  I  had  been 
more  backward  to  this,  had  I  known  of  C-  — r's  hearkning  so  far  to  such  a 
suggestion  as  to  consult  it.  But,  as  Providence  would  have  it,  an  Address 
from  a  dozen  of  his  principal  retainers  came  to  me  Post  express  ;  in  answer 
to  which  my  Eelaxation  was  returned  by  the  same  hand  on  the  4th.  They 
show  a  great  regard  for  linn",  and  satisfaction  in  his  administration,  extenu 
ate  his  ffault,  urge  the  loss  they're  at,  the  difficulty — nay,  the  impracticable- 
ness — of  supplying  his  place,  and  submissively  plead  the  restoring  him  to  ye 
exercise  of  his  Sacerdotal  powers.  I  suppose  the  suggestion  I  made  to  Mr. 
Bell  when  I  sent  him  the  Suspension  to  be  executed  (of  which  I  wrote  you 
in  my  last)  has  produced  this  effect.  I  expected  C-  — r  (as  I  also  suggested) 
should  have  been  the  bearer  of  that  Paper.  Xot  knowing  what  I  do  now,  I 
put  the  best  construction  on  his  not  comming ;  but  commiting  the 'Eelaxa 
tion  to  Mr.  Bell,  enjoyn'd  him  not  to  deliver  it  till  he  had  a  Lr-of  Penitence 
and  fair  promises  from  him  write  to  me,  to  be  sent  up.  I  have  not  a 
scrape  from  that  quarter  since  I  sent  up  the  Suspension,  save  the  Address ; 
and  impatiently  wait  Mr.  Bell's  Ace1  of  the  reception  of  the  Eelaxation, 
which  I  hope  puts  an  end  to  this  affair,  and  to  the  fine  project  of  some  rest 
less  troublcrs  of  our  peace,  who  wait  all  catches,  even  such  as  ordinary  men 
would  not  dream  of. 

Mr.  Mylne,  at  Faulklaiid,  was  Buried  on  Tuesday  last ;  where,  in  a 
meeting  of  his  retainers,  011  being  urged  to  recommend,  I  tabled  Dr. 
Barclay,  now  at  Edr,  and,  by  commission,  wrote  him  to  know  if  he  would 
accept  their  Call ;  but  do  not  expect  his  Answer  before  to-morrow  at 
soonest,  nor  his  compliance,  he  being  fallen  in  with  Harper  and  his  Club, 
who  are  a  projecting  his  Settlement  there.  F.'s  Meeting  House  was  the 
first  project ;  now  they're  on  putting  him  in  with  Mr.  Eae.  His  taking  up 
with  them  is  imputable  to  his  circumstances  ;  but  they  may  mistake  their 
man. 

Let  me  use  the  ffreedom  with  you  to  entreat  your  seeing  Sir  Al. 
Eamsey  as  soon  as  your  conveniency  will  allow,  which  will  be  a  singular 
favour  done,  E.  E.  D.  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  humble  Servant, 
Cupar,  Jan.  15,  1739.  BOB.  WHITE. 


288  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

III. — To  the  Put/Jit  Pier.  7V.  Thomax  Pmtiratj  of 

E.  E.  D.  Sir, — My  son  being  now  done  Avith  liis  Course  at  St.  And., 
has  taken  the  Degree,  and  come  home  to  me.  I  wrote  you  twice  lately — 
— once  before  you  left  Edr,  and  again  by  Mr.  William  Falconar — to  know 
wbat  I  might  expect  of  Sir  Alexr.  Piamsey  for  him,  but  have  got  no  return. 
Having  trusted  to  your  interest  with  Sir  Alexander,  and  to  the  word  you 
sent  me  last  year  by  Mr.  Lyon,  I  have  made  no  other  application  to  him. 
Now  'tis  high  time  I  should;  and  would  have  waited  on  him  before  now,  but 
that  I  have  not  a  scrape  under  cither  your  hand  or  his  (nothing  but  hearsay) 
to  insist  on  with  him.  Tho  I  doubt  not  of  your  having  his  promise,  as  Mr. 
Lyon  said,  yet  I'm  afl'raid  from  his  not  being  kept  in  mind  of  it,  and  from 
my  not  appearing,  he  may  conclude  me  indifferent,  and  bestow  the  flavour 
otherwise,  which,  no  doubt,  he'll  have  solicitations  for.  This  makes  me 
earnestly  intreat  yoii'll  lose  no  time  in  writing  Sir  Alexander,  on  account  of 
my  son's  situation  and  mine,  of  the  difficulty  I'm  under  for  his  further 
Education  ;  and  you  may  venture  to  tell  that  he  has  come  oft  with  a  good 
character  from  the  place  he  has  left.  I  do  not  mention  how  far  you're  to 
insist  with  him  on  his  promise,  because  I  know  not  yet  how  far  you  can. 
Let  me  also  as  earnestly  intreat  you  may  not  delay  writing  me,  so  as  that 
your  I/  may  be  an  introduction  to  my  addressing  Sir  Alexander,  and  a 
ground  of  pleading  with  him,  for  I  design  soon  to  visit  him,  and  to  be  at  a 
point  with  this.  I  hope  the  necessity  I  am  under,  of  giving  you  this  trouble, 
will  plead  an  excuse  for,  11.  Pi.  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Servant, 
Cupar,  June  17,  1710.  PIOB.  WIIITK. 

IV. — To  t/ic  Hii/ht  ltd'.  Mr.  John  Afc.cantlt'r  <tt  AUon. 

B.  R.  D.  Sir, — On  receiving  yours  of  March  5th  (which  gave  me  no 
small  concern),  I  wrote  K.,  expressing  my  fear  that  the  obstruction  comming 
in  the  manor  might  occasion  a  misunderstanding,  proceeding  from  suspicion 
that  the  project  Avas  design'dly  baulk'd,  especially  if  there  was  no  more  done 
to  bring  D.  and  G.  to  our  hand,  and  proposed  that  an  application  to  them 
should  be  made  by  us  for  obtaining  this  ;  but  have  not  a  scrape  from  K. 
since.  I  have  endeavour'd  this  by  myself,  and,  I  bless  God,  with  success. 
Last  Post  brought  me  a  Lr  from  (!.,  with  D.'s  to  me,  inclosed  open.  D. 
had,  on  receipt  of  mine,  wrote  G.  that  himself  had  altered  his  mind,  that  he 
had  Subscrib'd  the  Mandate,  that  he  knew  he  would  be  the  Elect,  and 
encourages  him,  very  Christianly,  to  accept.  He  sets  down  a  Copy  of  that 
Lr  under  his  Answer  to  me,  all  written  with  his  own  hand ;  and,  not 
doubting  of  the  Election,  expresses  to  me  his  earnest  desire  that  the  Conse 
cration  may  not  be  delayed.  G.  writes  me,  as  fully  as  I  would  expect  or 
desire,  his  Eesolution  to  be  passive,  and  succumb  in  compliance  with  the 
judgment  and  design  of  —  —  for  him.  I  hope  'tis  res  Intetp-a  in  Domino,  and, 
this  Hub  being  now  removed,  that  you'll  renew  your  diligence  and  keeness 
to  gratify  D.  in  his  desire,  which  I  heartily  joyn  and  second.  If  'tis 
frustrated  now,  G.  will  justly  think  it  an  affront  to  him,  and  it  will  not  fail 
of  raising  such  jealousy  as  Avill  break  our  unitie,  in  Avhich  you  justly  reckon 
our  safety  lies.  The  risquing  of  this  is  not  to  be  laid  in  the  balance  with  any 
dread  of  Edr  clamour.  Let  us  endeaA'our  the  strengthning  ourselves  (with- 
out  regard  to  that),  which  I  trust  the  bringing  this  design  to  bear  will  be  a 


ROBEET  WHITE.  289 

mean  of,  and  tend  to  our  comfort  and  the  benefite  of  this  afflicted  Church. 
Good  D.  is  hopefull  that  the  storm  will  How  over,  and  adds,  "  The  honest 
Labourer  must  be  doing,  and  trust  God  with  the  Season."  God  succeed 
our  endeavours,  and  grant  that  our  trials  may  be  found  unto  Praise, 
Honour,  and  Glory.  I  am,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Servant, 
Cupar,  April  loth,  1744.  ROB.  WHITE. 

V. — To  the  Jl'ujlit  Rev.  Mr.  John  Alexander,  at  Alloa. 

R.  R.  D.  Sir, — Mr  Livingston  in  his  Lr,  along  with  Mr.  William 
Abernethie,  pleads  with  me  to  refer  him  to  you  for  Trials  and  receiving  the 
Order  of  Deacon  :  the  gentleman  himself  desires  this.  Both  of  them  agree 
in  asking  it,  on  account  of  the  distance  and  trouble  it  would  be  to  him  to 
travel  and  attend  here.  I  am  loath  to  put  any  hardship  on  him,  and  there 
fore  remit  him  to  you  to  order  his  Trials  and  confer  that  dignity  upon  him. 
By  ye  short  conversation  I  have  had  with  him,  I  am  persuaded  your 
character  of  him  is  just,  and  your  hopes  of  him  right  founded. 

I  hope  my  Lr,  giving  you  an  Account  of  Bishop  Dunbar's  being  desirous 
of  Mr.  G— — d's  promotion,  and  his  yielding  to  accept,  is  come  to  your 
hands,  and  shall  not  doubt  of  your  exerting  yourself  to  have  it  expcded. 
Mr  G.  may  take  it  as  an  affront  if  'tis  baulk'd  now,  and  I  think  I  would 
share  with  him  in  it.  K.  writes  me  that  Mr.  Bell  is  to  be  brought  to  Blair 
and  Hunter's  House.  I  wish  he  do  not  change  his  mind  on  this.  However, 

K.  thinks  himself  secure  of  him,  and  is  only  afraid  of  Messrs  D ss  and 

C r.     Pray   bestir   yourself  to    secure   them.     D ss,  B — — ly,  and 

E n,  have  L"  from  me  on  the  subject.     I  shall  be  anxious  to  know  how 

matters  stand  with  respect  to  this. 

My  wife  and  son  tender  their  humble  duty  and  good  wishes  to  you ; 
and  I  am,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  Brother  and  humble  Servant, 
Cupar,  April  15,  1744.  ROB.  WHITE. 


the.  IVijltt  Her.  Mr.  John  Alexander,  at  Alloa. 

R.  R.  D.  Sir, — You  have  very  just  thoughts  of  Bishop  Smith's  extrava 
gant  Lr,  and  of  my  resolution  to  withstand  all  attempts  and  incroachments 
of  that  nature,  thu  all  his  Brethren  in  England  should  second  him.  I  was 
at  Dundee  last  week  burying  my  nephew's  wife.  Mr.  Raitt,  however  he's 
fretted,  will  stand  united  with  us  against  both  Smith's  and  Edr's  attacks.  I 
proposed  a  Meeting  of  us  ffoure,  which  he  goes  in  with,  at  Kiughorn,  Kenno- 
way,  Ffalkland,  or  Cupar,  of  which  I  am  to  write  Bishop  Keith,  who  has 
twice  mov'd  it  to  me  that  our  Meeting  would  be  proper ;  and  tells  me  that 
he  wrote  Bishop  Smith,  promising  me  a  Copy  of  what  he  wrote,  but  'tis  not 
yet  come  to  hand.  I  wish  he  had  advis'd  us  before  he  wrote,  for  tho  I  doubt 
not  of  his  saying  right  things,  pi  it*  rident  ocidi,  &c.  Till  I  see  what  he  has 
said  I  cannot  say  what's  farther  to  be  done.  Your  two  Ordinations  are 
acceptable  to  me,  as  it  will  be  to  see  Mr.  Abernathy  here.  I  beg  of  you 

push  for  Mr.  G d's  Election,  without  regard  to  his  pleading  a  delay.  If 

this  is  effected,  it  will  be  a  great  strengthening  of  our  Union  ;  if  not,  I  cannot 
secure  against  wrong  constructions  and  jealousies  impairing  it. 

Yesterday  all  our  Efife  Presbyters  were  with  me.     We  had  no  business 

VOL.   II.  2  O 


292  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

for  establishing  uniformitie  betwixt  the  2  Churches.  Archbishop  Laud 
and  his  Brethren,  and  all  our  then  Bishops,  thought  it  did  so.  Why 
should  we  not  think  wl  them,  rather  than  with  Bishop  Smith '?  His  2  Dis 
courses  for  showing  that  the  English  Liturgy  Blesseth  and  Offereth,  &c.,  by 
ye  very  design  of  them,  arc  an  encomium  on  ours  ;  and,  more,  prove  it 
preferable  to  the  English,  than  make  out  what  he  intended  in  favour  of  it. 
If  there  arc  any  political  views  in  this  proposal,  I  shall  judge  of  them  when 
let  into  them ;  but  I  neither  act  by  these  nor  am  soon  startled  with  them. 
It  seems  he  has  found  a  party  here  for  suppressing  our  Liturgy,  and  has 
done  enough  already  to  spirit  them  up.  If  he  persists,  it  must  be  con 
structed  a  heading  of  them.  Should  any  of  us,  nay,  all  of  us,  joyn  in  this, 
a  party  much  stronger  would  soon  appear,  and  justly  too  ;  and  instead  of  a 
better,  would  put  us  in  a  Avorse  and  more  divided  situation  than  ever  since 

another  Re than  the  Reformation.     But  I'm  not  aifraid  of  this  taking 

with  any  Brother. 

B.  K.  writes  mo  I  shall  have  my  Confirmation  of  this  District  in  fibrin, 
so  soon  as  I  resign  Dumblauc.  But  since  I  promised  to  hold  both,  and 
obliged  myself  to  resign  at  the  desire  of  the  majoritie,  I  think  it  proper  I 
should  be  iirst  Confirmed  in  this,  to  save  my  being  cast  loose ;  and  then,  as 
soon  as  shall  be  thought  fit,  require  my  resignation  by  ye  majoritie,  whose 
doing  so  will  supersede  my  asking  acceptance  of  my  resignation,  and  so 

save  some  trouble  and  time.     I  am  of  B.  K.'s  mind,  that  ye  sooner  D n 

is  right  supplied  the  better,  and  am  glad  he  hopes  it  may  fall  to  Mr.  G. 

I  have  inclosed  a  Lr  to  Mr.  Douglass,  and  another  to  Mr.  Conachar,  to 
be  used  by  B.  K.  and  you  as  shall  be  thought  fit.  Mr.  Lyon  sent  me  some 
time  ago  ;-}  Copies  of  the  Printed  Proposals  for  Publishing  Lit.  Jnc<>!>.,  with 
a  Commission,  I  suppose,  of  ye  same  nature  w'  yours.  I  Avish  Ave  succeed 
in  getting  Subscriptions:  Avc'll  easily  agree  about  the  Remittance. 

I  have  put  oft'  this  ffortnight  past  the  giving  you  a  Return,  in  expecta 
tion  of  my  son's  returning  from  Mcarns  and  Angus,  and  of  some  Ace1  of 
Bishop  Rait  by  him  ;  but  the  one  is  not  arrived,  and  ye  other  is  yet  silent. 
My  Avife  Avas  glad  to  hear  of  your  Avelfare,  and  returns  you  ye  tender  of  her 
respects.  I  pray  all  happiness  to  you,  and  am, 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Servant, 
November  28.  ROB.  WHITE. 

P.S. — Pray  let  me  have  an  authentick  Copic  of  our  last  Synod's 
Transactions. 

LVII.  HENRY  EDGAR.    A.D.  1759,  Coaclj.    A.D.  1761-65. 

His  name  is  sometimes  Printed  as  Harry,  and  Harie ;  but 
Mr.  Andrew  Jervise  settles  the  doubt  in  the  following  Baptismal 
Entry  in  the  Brechin  Records,  given  in  his  "Land  of  the  Lind 
says,'"  p.  271  (Note)  :- 

April  2,  1G98.  David  Edgar  of  Keythick,  husband  to  Elizabeth 
Guthrie,  had  a  son  Baptized  named  Hendrie.  "Witnesses,  Hendrie  Maull  of 
Kellie,  Hendrie  Graham  of  Menorgan,  Hendrie  Guthrie. 


HEXRY  EDGAR.  293 

This  batch  of  Huidrics  would  now-a-days  bo  despoiled  of  the 
letter  //,  and  have  ic  changed  into  //. 

The  Bishop  was  of  the  Edgars  of  Wadderlie.  According  to 
the  "MS.  Memoirs  of  the  Episcopal  Church  of  Scotland,"  it  is 
stated  that,  before  Bishop  Edgar's  appointment  as  Coadjutor, 
Bishop  White,  the  Primus,  wrote  to  a  Clergyman  living  in 
Dumfries,  soliciting  his  Vote  for  Mr.  Harry  Edgar,  to  be  Conse 
crated  Hisho})  of  Glasfjow ;  but  the  Clergyman  gave  no  answer. 
Mr.  Edgar  was  not  Elected  by  any  Presbyters.  Notwithstand 
ing,  his  Consecration,  as  Coadjutor  to  Bishop  White,  took  place 
at  Cupar-Eifc  on  S.  Luke's  Day,  the  18th  October,  1759.  The 
Primus  was  Consecrator,  assisted  by  Bishops  Ealconar,  Raitt, 
and  Alexander. 

The  Lands  of  Keithock  (or  Keithick),  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Brechin,  belonged  to  the  Lindsays,  who  were  forced  to  mort 
gage  their  property. 

Oil  tlic  sale  of  Kcithock  by  the  Lindsays,  a  younger  son  of  the  old 
Family  of  Edgar  of  "Wadderlie  became  proprietor.  David  Edgar  of  Keith 
ock,  who  bought  the  property  from  his  cousin  Thomas  (the  father  of  John  of 
Poland),  had  a  large  family,  among  whom  were  John  and  James,  who  bore 
prominent  parts  during  the  Rebellion  of  1715.  The  former  Died  a  prisoner 
in  Stirling  Castle,  and  the  latter,  escaping  to  Italy,  became  the  well  known 
Private  Secretary  of  the  Chevalier,  and  Died  at  Rome  in  September  17G2, 
where  "he  was  Buried  by  a  Protestant  Clergyman,  according  to  the  Pdtes 
of  the  Church  of  England.''  He  was  a  person  of  great  worth,  and,  as 
appears  not  only  by  the  Letters  of  the  Chevalier  and  his  son  Prince  Charles, 
but  by  those  of  the  fugitive  Nobles,  was  one  in  whom  all  had  the  most 
implicit  confidence.  His  fidelity  to  the  cause  of  his  exiled  master  was  un 
impeachable,  as  the  following  anecdote  by  his  great-grand-niece  amply 
illustrates: — "Some  considerable  time  after  the  '  Fifteen, '  the  British 
Government  had  reason  to  believe  that  another  attempt  was  to  be  made  for 
the  exiled  family.  Sir  Robert  Walpolc  directed  his  spies  to  learn  who  was 
most  in  King  James'  confidence,  and  what  were  the  character  and  circum 
stances  of  the  individual.  He  was  told  that  the  King's  private  Secretary 
was  the  younger  son  of  a  Scotch  Laird  of  small  fortune  ;  that  he  was  of  a 
generous,  hospitable  turn,  fond  of  entertaining  his  Countrymen  when  at 
Rome  ;  and  that  he  had  but  a  small  salary.  This  was  just  what  Sir  Robert 
wanted,  and  he  wrote  to  Edgar,  offering  a  handsome  sum  if  he  would  betray 
the  intentions  of  his  master.  Edgar  put  the  Letter  into  the  fire,  and 
returned  110  answer.  Several  other  Epistles  bearing  advanced  offers  met 
the  same  fate.  Sir  Robert  thinking  he  had  not  yet  come  up  to  the  Secre 
tary's  price,  then  wrote  (and  this  time  without  making  any  conditions)  that 
he  had  placed  £10,000  in  the  Bank  of  Venice  in  the  name  of  Mr.  Edgar. 
The  Secretary  then  consulted  his  master,  and,  after  a  brief  interval,  returned 


291  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

for  answer  that  lie  had  received  Sir  Robert's  Letter,  lie  thanked  him  for 
the  i'10,000,  which  he  had  lost  no  time  in  drawing  from  the  Bank,  and  had 
just  laid  at  the  feet  of  his  11  oval  master,  who  had  the  best  title  to  gold  that 
came,  as  this  had  done,  from  England." 

Alexander,  the  penultimate  Laird  of  Keithock,  Died  about  17GK,  and 
was  succeeded  by  his  son  John,  who,  like  his  uncles,  was  a  staunch  sup 
porter  of  the  Stuarts,  and  joined  their  Cause  at  the  age  of  nineteen.  Ho 
lied  to  France  on  the  final  defeat  of  the  Rebels  at  Culloden,  and  served  under 
Lord  Ogilvy  until  the  passing  of  the  Act  of  Indemnity  in  1750,  when  he 
returned  to  Scotland,  lie  Married  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Ogilvy,  Minister  of 
Tannadice,  and,  down  to  his  latest  breath,  when  quaffing  the  goblet  of  wine 
or  ale,  he  indulged  in  the  rather  equivocal  toast  of  drinking — "  T<>  lh<'  Kimj 
o'er  ill,-  inili-r!"  Keithock  being  greatly  mortgaged  at  the  time  of  John's 
Succession,  it  was  sold  in  17SK)  (two  years  after  his  Death)  ;  and  although 
the  Family  lias  passed  from  the  District  of  Brechin,  numerous  descendants 
survive  in  America  and  various  parts  of  Great  Britain.  [./crr/V.s  J.lcex  of 
the  Linihuijx,  ]>.  270.] 

For  much  of  this  information,  Mr.  Jcrvisc  is  indebted  to  Miss 
Watson  (daughter  of  the  late  Bishop  Watson  of  Dunkeld), 
through  the  courtesy  of  William  Baillie,  Esq.,  Edinburgh. — both 
great-grand-children  of  Alexander  Edgar  of  Keithock. 

Bishop  Edgar  was  brother  of  Mr.  Edgar,  Titular  Earl  of 
Alford,  Secretary  to  the  Chevalier,  whose  eldest  brother,  the 
above  Alexander,  succeeded  to  the  Estate  of  Keithock.  Henry, 
younger  brother,  fourth  Bishop  of  Fife,  was  for  3G  years  Pastor 
of  the  Episcopal  Church  in  Arbroath,  where  he  Died  (as  intimated 
by  his  Tombstone  in  the  Abbey  Burial-ground),  on  the  21st  of 
August  1705,  in  the  CTtli  year  of  his  age. 

The  following  Correspondence  was  found  in  Bishop  Jolly's 
Kist,  copied  in  Bishop  Alexander's  handwriting  :— 

I. — To  tlie  llii/Iit  Her.  Mr.  John  Alexander,  at  Alloa,  can'  of  Mr.  Ditcitl  Xecai/, 
Merchant,  Kdiubiti'ijh.      Prosecution  (ti/ftinst  Mr.  ]i'il//nr,  Arhroath. 

R.  11.  D.  Sir, — I  was  much  conccrn'd  that  I  could  not  have  the  pleasure 
of  seeing  you  when  at  Edr,  being  oblig'd  to  wait  there  (for  Captain  George 
Lindsay,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  1G  years)  till  my  time  was  run  out. 
Before  I  return'd  to  Angus,  there  was  a  most  unlucky  affair  happened  at 
Arbroath  with  Mr.  Edgar.  It  was  this  :  some  of  the  Military  had  been 
there  for  some  time,  and  differed  with  the  Magistrates,  which  is  given  for 
the  reason  of  Mr.  Edgar's  trouble.  The  way  they  took  to  ensnare  him  was 
most  subtile  :  they  sent  a  soldier  to  his  house,  who  earnestly  importun'd 
Mr.  Edgar  for  Prayers,  who  was  so  easy  as  to  yield  to  his  request.  It 
seems  he  thought  (viz.,  the  soldier)  that  Mr.  Edgar  exceeded  the  Numbers, 
went  directly  to  the  Officer  and  informed.  Upon  which  the  Officer  wrote  to 
General  Churchhill,  who  sent  the  information  to  London,  which  was 


HENEY  EDGAR.  295 

returned  V  peremptory  Orders  to  prosecute  the  Clergyman  forthwith. 
Accordingly  lie  was  tried  at  Forfar  on  the  3rd,  hefore  Carsgownie.  The 
Witnesses  adduced  on  the  trial  were  the  soldier  who  had  heen  the  hearer, 
an  old  Chelsea  pensioner,  and  a  common  man  in  Arhroath — in  all,  three. 
The  Lyhel  ran  in  these  terms  : — "  That  whereas  Mr.  Edgar  had  officiate  in 
his  on  house  on  the  9th  Scptr.,  or  one  or  other  of  the  Sundays  of  said 
inoneth,  to  more  than  4  wl  his  family,  and  not  prayed  in  express  words  : 
therefore  he  ought  to  he  punished  according  to  Law,  and  the  hearers  fined 
of  £5  each."  It  was  objected  by  Mr.  Edgar's  Procutor,  that  as  the  Lybel  was 
in  vague  terms,  and  not  confined  to  a  precise  day,  that  neither  he  nor  the 
hearers  could  easily  exculpate  themselves  by  proving  alilii ;  so,  with  some 
difficulty,  both  the  informer  and  the  Fiscal  yielded  that  point,  and  fixed  on 
the  9th  of  Septr.  None  of  the  Witnesses  except  the  soldier  swore  to  the 
Lybel ;  upon  which  the  Sheriff  assolized  Mr.  Edgar  w'  a  caution  to  be  on 
his  guard  for  the  future  ;  for  had  the  Lybel  been  proven,  the  Judge  behoved 
to  have  condemned  ye  Pannel.  This  has  given  no  small  uneasiness  to  all 
of  us  here.  Messrs.  Seton  and  Cruthrie  are  both  strictly  coufiu'd  to  the 
Number,  by  advice,  as  the  soldiers  at  Forfar  are  on  the  catch.  For  myself, 
I  use  some  more  freedom,  as  being  at  a  distance  from  these  Civil,  I  had 
almost  said  uncivil,  neighbours,  none  of  them  being  nearer  than  Kirremuir. 
I  thought  proper  to  inform  you  of  this,  in  case  none  else  had  done.  It  is 
the  substance  of  the  whole  affair,  which  we  have  reason  to  be  thankful 
turn'd  out  so  lucky  for  Mr.  Edgar ;  for  had  he  been  brought  in,  it's  a 
question  where  it  would  have  ended.  As  I  have  near  finished  my  paper,  I 
shall  only  beg  your  paternal  benediction,  and  remain,  as  ever,  most  respect 
fully,  11.  11.  D.  Sir, 

Your  obedient  son  and  most  humble  Servant, 
Mcmus,  Novr.  IGth,  1750.  JOHN  RAMSAY. 

II. — To  Ijixlioj)  Wliit<',  an  llie  atj'ftir  of  the  Application,  (tn<l  tlie  dain/er  of  it. 

R.  R.  D.  Sir, — The  occasion  of  my  writing  to  you  at  present  gives  me 
no  small  uneasiness,  both  upon  your  own  ace'  and  that  of  this  poor  afflicted 
Church,  in  the  preservation  of  which  we  have  all  an  equal  concern.  After 
what  I  wrote  you  in  my  last,  of  Feb.  13th,  how  was  I  amazed  to  find  by  a 
Lr  from  Gr.,  that  you  had  made  use  of  my  name  to  perswade  him  to  agree  to 
your  project  for  procuring  a  Nomination  for  R',  by  saying  that  I  had 
cordially  gone  in  w'  it !  I  am  at  a  loss  how  to  ace*  for  this,  and  shall  abstain 
from  making  harsh  or  unkind  reflections  upon  it.  Only  desire  that  in  your 
next  Lr  to  him,  you'll  set  him  right  in  this  matter,  by  barely  telling  him  the 
truth,  or  sending  my  Lr  to  him,  that  he  may  judge  for  himself.  He  very  wisely 
and  justly  lays  before  me  the  danger  and  ruin  that  must  attend  such  a  step 
upon  a  discovery,  which  it  seems  impossible  to  avoid ;  and  I  think  I  could 
not  have  declared  my  dissent  from  it  in  more  express  terms  than  I  did  to 
you.  I  spoke,  indeed,  with  all  due  respect  of  R'-  and  H.  E.;  and,  thu  I 
declined  being  active,  told  you  I  should  be  determined  by  a  majority  of  my 
Brethren  in  every  point  of  Discipline  ;  but  gave  it  as  my  opinion  that  things 
at  Edr  should  be  allowed  to  rest  in  the  way  they  had  been  in  for  many 
years,  and  110  motion  made  to  raise  new  dust.  And,  particularly,  as  to  the 
Application,  I  declared  I  would  not  concur  in  it,  for  reasons  which  might 
have  been  obvious  to  you,  as  they  were  to  me,  but  I  chose  not  then  to  insist 
upon.  You  know  very  well,  my  dear  sir,  how  much  such  practices  were 


296  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

exclaimed  agl  in  former  times,  and  by  none  more  than  yourself,  for  the 
perils  and  confusions  they  involved  us  in ;  and  surely  the  reasons  ag'  them 
are  not^  less,  but  much  more,  cogent  now  than  they  were  then.  Our  late 
calamities  were  chiefly  owing  to  the  notion  our  enemies  had  conceived  of  us, 
that  AVC  were  all  Nominees,  and  kept  up  an  illicito  correspondence ;  and  any 
respite  we  have  since  enjoyed,  proceeds  from  their  having  been  undeceived 
in  this  respect,  and  assured  that  none  of  our  number  are  such.  You  are  not 
to  think  that  the  inhibition  w'  regard  to  Edr  is  any  secret  to  them  ;  and  if 
it  is  taken  off,  and  y<  See  filled,  the  consequence"  is  clear ;  and  they  will 
easily  conclude  by  what  means,  tlm  there  Avere  no  other  way  of  coming  at 
the  truth,  as  there  are  but  too  many.  I  cannot,  therefore,'  imagine  what 
could  be  your  motive  to  precipitate  our  destruction  by  so  temerarious  an 
action,  especially  as  it  cannot  answer  your  end,  nor  serve  the  person  you  in 
tend  it  should,  who,  I  dare  say,  is  wiser  than  to  thank  you  for  it.  Moreover, 
you  know  that  when  we  Elected  you  our  Primus,  it  was  in  the  forms  of  our 
Canons,  which,  if  you'll  consult,  you'll  iind  do  not  entitle  you  to  act  by  your 
self  alone,  especially  in  matters  of  so  much  consequence  to  our  Society  as 
this  is.  I  wish  then,  if  it  is  yet  in  your  power,  that  you  would  countermand 
these  iatal  dispatches,  and  henceforth  cease  perplexing  us  Avith  further 
schemes,  and  sutler  us  to  live  and  die  in  peace.  As  to  Promotions,  I  have 
said  from  the  beginning  that  I  saw  no  immediate  necessity  of  proceeding  to 
any,  as,  thanks  to  God,  we  are  not  so  few  as  should  make  us  dread  any 
imminent  danger  of  the  Succession  failing;  and  I  hope  we  may  rely  upon 
His  goodness  that  3  of  us  will  not  drop  off  at  once.  As  likewise  there  is  no 
appearance  of  that  unanimity  that  were  to  be  wished  for  in  our  choice  of 
Candidates,  and  the  person  you  have  all  along  pointed  at  has  shown  so 
much  rashness  and  imprudence  in  promoting  this  conceit  of  yours,  as  gives 
just  ground  to  some  of  us  to  doubt  whether  he  would  be  so  proper  a  person 
to  be  assumed  as  we  were  otherwise  Avilling  to  believe  ;  on  these  considera 
tions^  I  say  I  am  for  laying  aside  all  thoughts  of  this  at  present,  and 
referring  the  decision  entirely  to  Providence,  by  the  Election  of  the  Clergy 
of  the  District  that  first  becomes  vacant,  Avhiciris  the  only  warrantable  Avay, 
being  determined  for  my  OAVH  part  to  abstract  further  meddling  in  publick 
affairs,  unless  I  find  I  can  lie  the  instrument  of  doing  some  great  good,  or 
preventing  some  evident  hurt  to  our  dear  Mother,  the  Church ;  and  confine 
myself  solely  to  the  business  of  my  particular  Charge.  And  this  being  my 
firm  resolution,  there  will  be  no  occasion  for  the  visit  I  intended  you  "after 
Easter;  but  that  shall  not  diminish  the  regard  I  have  always  had  of  you, 
nor  hinder  me  from  continuing 

Your  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Servant, 
Alloa,  March  17,  1750.  JOHN  ALEXANDER. 

HI- — To  nishoji  WDI.  Fii/contn;  in  Iu'}>li/  to  an  ant/ri/  Letter  about  II.  E.,  tfc. 

B.  B.  D.  Sir,— I  received  yours  of  the  27th,  with  one  from  the  Presby 
inclosed,  by  last  week's  carrier.  It  did  not  so  much  affect  me  with  sur 
prize,  as  I  am  HOAV  hardened  with  ill  usage,  as  with  sorrow  and  pity  for 
our  state.  However,  I  immediately  wrote  to  G.,  who  is  equally  concerned; 
and,  Avhen  I  hear  from  him,  shall  give  the  Primus  an  Answer.  This  is  no 
affected  delay,  but  a  regular  way  of  proceeding,  as  I  chuse  not  to  do  any 
thing  without  common  concurrence,  or  in  a  clandestine  way.  The  good 
Primus  charges  me  either  with  disingenuity  or  inconsistency,  and  with 


HENEY  EDGAE.  297 

bringing  E.  F.  upon  the  carpet :  all  which  I  deny  and  defy  him  to  prove 
from  anything  in  my  Protest.  You  bring  still  heavier  charges  against  me, 
which  I  shall  consider  by  and  by,  and  only  observe  at  present  that  this  is 
not  the  most  engaging  way  of  asking  a  favour. 

I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  W.  should  have  a  Coadjutor — he  needs  it 
much — and  that  H.  E.  should  be  the  person.  I  esteem  him  highly,  and 
shall,  God  willing,  assist  at  his  Consecration,  when  called  in  the  terms  of 
the  Protest.  But  you  see  no  reason,  you  say,  for  insisting  on  the  Eoss 
Clergy  at  the  same  time.  I  cannot  help  that;  but  am  sure  I  have  given 
many  in  my  last  and  former  Letters  to  you,  none  of  which  have  yet  been 
answered.  I  shall  now  add  one  more,  which  is — That  truly  it  is  no  such 
easy  matter  for  one  of  my  age  to  make  long  journeys  every  day,  nor  is  it  so 
safe  for  us  to  have  frequent  Meetings  of  that  kind,  and,  therefore,  as  much 
should  be  dispatched  at  once  as  we  can.  Another  good  reason  your  Letter 
before  me  suggests.  As  you  seem  to  dread  danger  from  the  Juntoe's 
influence  in  Eoss,  I  judge  the  best  way  to  prevent  it  is  to  provide  them  in 
time,  and  even  to  gratify  them  in  their  first  choice  would  be  the  readiest 
means  to  keep  them  steady  to  the  interests  of  the  Church ;  besides  that  it 
would  cordially  unite  us  all,  and  keep  the  Succession,  in  all  humane  views, 
out  of  danger  of  failing,  at  least  for  some  time.  And  would  our  Brethren 
drop  their  opposition,  without  which  I  would  not  be  for  having  him 
appointed,  I  think  it  would  be  the  luckiest  thing  that  could  happen  to  us  ; 
besides  that  it  would  give  the  Primus  the  comfort  to  be  cordially  united 
with  all  his  Brethren,  and  leave  the  Society  in  a  peaceful  and  united  state. 
And  I  confess  all  the  objections  I  have  yet  heard  laid  against  him,  are  not 
enough  to  balance  these  good  effects  in  my  poor  opinion.  Whether  he  would 
comply  I  cannot  say,  as  I  never  corresponded  with  him  on  that  subject, 
except  that  lately  he  told  me  you  had  proposed  his  settling  at  Inverness, 
and  taking  up  that  Charge ;  which  I  said,  if  he  inclined,  I  should  not  be 
against.  But  I  am  apt  to  think,  if  we  should  unite  in  urging  him,  he  might 
be  brought  to  comply,  and  then  we  might  proceed  to  both  without  delay. 

I  now  come  to  the  blustering  harsher  part  of  your  Epistle.  You  tell 
me  my  last  gave  you  great  pain  ;  and  I  say  that  indeed  it  could  not  give  you 
greater  in  reading  than  it  did  me  in  writing.  But  was  there  not  a  cause  ? 
I  chuse  not  to  rip  up  sores  ;  but  consult  your  own  heart  coolly,  and  perhaps 
it  may  suggest  to  you  that,  instead  of  an  accusation,  I  might  have  looked  for 
an  acknowledgment,  which,  since  you  do  not  deign  to  make  to  me,  I  shall 
to  you.  I  own  then,  that  the  coining  in  of  your  Letters  at  the  critical  time 
they  did,  threw  me  a  little  off  my  guard ;  and  since  you  think  I  used  a 
sarcasm,  whether  I  intended  so  or  not,  I  stand  corrected,  and  retract  that 
expression,  and  shall  not  use  it  again.  I  said  nothing  else  but  what  I  think 
not  only  defensible  but  highly  becoming.  'Tis  true,  you  allege,  in  a  pom 
pous  and  swelling  strain,  that  I  fulminated  ingeminated  woes  and  execra 
tions  against  my  Brethren.  But  where  is  this  to  be  found  ?  In  your  own 
imagination,  not  in  my  Letter;  which,  had  you  been  possessed  of  that 
meekness  which  you  task  me  so  severely  with  the  want  of,  you  would  not 
rashly  have  put  so  uncharitable  a  construction  upon  my  words.  The  son  of 
Croesus,  thu  dumb  before,  broke  silence  when  he  saw  the  blow  impending  to 
take  away  his  father's  life  ;  and  my  zeal  to  avert  the  danger  wherewith  I 
beheld  my  dearest  Mother  threatened,  moved  me  to  make  use  of  these  words 
of  Him  who  never  spoke  in  vain.  But  I  mentioned  no  names.  You  who 

VOL.   II.  2  P 


298  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

make  the  Application  are  accountable  for  that :  the  Denunciation  is  general 
and  indefinite.  When  the  offence  is  given,  the  woe  must  follow ;  hut, 
thanks  to  kind  Providence,  and  Mr.  Edgar's  wisdom,  which  prevented  it. 
You  next  call  me  stiff,  and  imperious,  and  what  not.  Had  you  answered 
my  reasons,  it  would  have  done  much  hotter  than  thus  to  load  me  with 
reflections.  As  to  stiffness,  when  in  a  good  cause,  I  may  at  least  say  you 
miscall  it.  Steadiness  is  the  word;  and  steadiness  in  the  cause  of  truth 
and  justice  is  a  manly  virtue.  However,  I  take  this  much  better  than  if  you 
had  called  me  a  changeling,  tossed  to  and  fro  with  every  blast,  and  never  to 
be  found  where  you  left  me.  As  to  imperiousness,  I  disclaim  it  as  utterly 
inconsistent  with  my  temper.  I  have  a  title  to  offer  advice  in  what  concerns 
the  publick  weal ;  but  counsel  is  no  command,  and  if  I  can  answer  for  my 
self,  I  would  not  take  upon  me  to  answer  for  others  by  compelling  them,  thu 
I  had  the  power.  And  now  to  your  last  and  heaviest  charge — that  I 
threaten  a  fatal  breach,  Arc.  How  you  come  to  discover  this,  I  confess  I  am 
to  seek.  Peace  must  doubtless  be  a  very  precious  jewel,  since  they  who  are 
enemies  or  strangers  to  the  thing  affect  the  name.  That  I  had  no  such 
intention  is  plain  from  my  Protest,  which,  tho  I  thought  myself  bound  to 
enter  for  my  own  vindication  of  being  accessory  to  an  irregular  measure,  it 
never  entered  into  my  mind  to  make  a  breach  with  my  Brethren.  'Tis 
true,  indeed,  a  breach  there-  would  have  been,  if  that  affair  had  taken  place, 
but  it  would  have  been  made  by  others,  and  not  by  me.  You  know  well 
enough  our  Canons  are  the  basis  and  bond  of  our  peace.  You  need  not  be 
told  who  made  the  first  infringement  upon  them,  from  whence  all  our  dis 
orders  have  since  flowed;  and  should  they  be  given  up,  as  has  been  aimed 
at  oftcuer  than  once  since,  I  tremble  to  think  what  ruin  and  confusion  must 
follow,  when  every  one  is  left  to  do  what  seems  right  in  his  own  eyes.  To 
conclude,  whoever  thinks  to  establish  peace  upon  the  ruins  of  truth,  justice, 
and  honour,  will  find  a  false  and  deceitful  delusion,  and  must  soon  lose  them 
all,  and  inward  peace  to  boot.  Let  me  not,  therefore,  be  again  upbraided 
with  this  ;  for  so  long  as  I  stand  to  rule  and  order,  I  am  sure  I  stand 
upright,  and  shall  not  be  afraid  of  the  censure  of  man.  God  help  us  all  to 
continue  stedfast  in  the  Unity  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  Bond  of  Peace  and 
Righteousness  of  Life,  and  to  lay  aside  all  our  little  bickerings  and  quarrels, 
and  make  it  our  study  to  love  Him  and  one  another.  I  am,  &c., 

JOHN  ALEXANDER. 

IV. — To  Uix/iiiji  WiUinin  Fdlcitiinf.      <(f  Bixhnii  White  auil  Mr.  Etljur. 

Pi.  E.  D.  Sir, — I  wrote  you  a  fortnight  ago  a  hint  of  what  concerned 
you  more  fully  to  know,  but  it  seems  by  your  abstractedness  in  not  writing, 
you  affect  an  indifferency  in  our  affairs.  However,  that  the  Church  may 
not  suffer  thro'  my  default,  I  here  subjoin  (for  your  own  use  allenerly)  a 
Copy  of  a  Letter  that  I  have  this  day  sent  to  W.,  which  will  make  a  fuller 
discovery  of  certain  practices,  which  I  neither  think  justifiable  in  them 
selves,  nor  carried  on  in  a  fair  manner.  I  leave  you  to  take  such  measures 
upon  it  as  you  shall  judge  most  proper.  I  opposed  your  scheme  of  the  Sus 
pension,  because  I  thought  myself  bound  in  honour  and  conscience  so  to 
do ;  and  for  the  same  reason  I  have  opposed  this,  as  exposing  our  Society 
to  utter  extinction.  Our  Brother  is  prolifick  in  projects.  If  he  goes  on  at 
this  rate,  he  will  not  rest  till  he  ruins  us.  He  writes  me  you  have  been 
urging  him  to  hasten  H.  E.'s  Consecration.  I  have  not  opposed  it  till  now 


HENRY  EDGAR.  200 

that  1  think  I  have  some  reason  ;  but  if  you  concur,  my  opposing  will  be  of 
no  consequence,  and  I  shall  give  myself  no  farther  trouble,  only  I  wish  you 
may  consider  ripely  what  it  may  produce.  If  you  keep  aloof,  you  may 
depend  upon  being  supported  by  G.  and  me.  Whether  you  can  do  so  by 
the  others  supposing  the  matter  to  be  indifferent,  I  leave  yourself  to  judge. 
The  balance  is  in  your  hand,  and  I  pray  God  direct  you  right.  If  you 
incline  to  concert  measures,  and  come  to  an  eclaircissement  of  the  whole 
plot,  I  am  to  be  at  Dimfermline,  on  Thursday,  April  Gth  ;  and  if  you 
can  steal  away  early,  you  may  be  at  the  old  place  by  2,  and,  if  needful, 
return  the  same  night.  No  one  needs  to  know  that  you  are  out  of  Town.  I 
wait  your  answer,  and  am.  &c.. 

JOHN  ALKXANDKK. 

V. — ]>ix/i»i>  Ali',ni>nl/'r  In   Mr.   J^/li/nr,   enclosini/   </    (/"/'//  '//'  A/.v    L/'thr  to   t/ir 
l.'i'iuiiix,  /ni/1  xititiit/i  A/.s  inability  In  In'  ]>i'<'xrnt  /it  In*  Consecration. 

R.  I).  Sir, — I  had  a  Letter  last  Post  from  our  Primus,  inviting  me  to 
assist  at  your  Consecration  on  S.  Barth.'s  Day ;  and  it  gives  me  the  deepest 
concern  that  I  cannot  be  present,  chiefly  on  your  account,  for  whom  I  have 
long  had  a  real  high  esteem,  and  whose  Promotion  in  a  regular  way  I  have 
long  hoped  and  looked  for.  My  reasons  of  dissent  I  have  this  day  drawn 
out,  and  sent  in  a  Letter  to  the  Primus,  of  which  a  Copy  follows  : — 

"  R.  R.  D.  Sir, — I  received  your  Letter  of  the  18th  current  by  the  last 
Post,  inviting  me  to  Cupar  to  assist  at  the  Consecration  of  my  worthy 
friend,  Mr.  Edgar.  As  he  is  a  person  whom  I  highly  esteem,  and  for  whose 
merit  I  have  a,  just  regard,  I  should  have  attended  with  the  greatest 
pleasure,  which  I'm  sorry  the  indiscretion  that  has  appeared  in  the  manage 
ment  of  that  affair  deprives  me  of.  By  this  you  will  perceive  that  I  have  no 
intention  to  object  against  the  Candidate,  but  the  manner  of  his  Promotion, 
which  I  always  hoped  would  have  been  in  an  honourable  and  orderly  way. 
We  arc  environed  with  enemies  of  various  kinds,  who  watch  for  our  halting, 
and  will  not  fail  to  make  advantage  of  every  false  step  we  take,  and  even 
industriously  labour  to  create  discord  and  division  amongst  us  ;  so  that  now, 
if  ever,  AVC  should  proceed  with  union  and  circumspection,  and  avoid  giving 
the  least  handle  for  those  who  hate  and  malign  us  to  vex  us,  especially  as 
there  appears  not  the  least  necessity  for  doing  so.  To  do  a  thing  irregularly, 
which  may  be  done  in  a  regular  and  unexceptionable  manner,  is  at  least,  I 
may  be  allowed  to  say,  not  the  wisest  way  of  proceeding,  and  I  cannot  pre 
vail  with  myself  to  join  in  it  for  the  following  reasons  : — 1st,  This  is  directly 
contrary  to  S.  Paul's  Canons,  '  Let  every  thing  be  done  to  edification,  and 
let  everything  be  done  decently  and  in  order.'  These  are  of  universal 
obligation,  and  stand  in  need  of  no  comment.  2ndly.  It  is  against  our  own 
Canons,  which  provide  that  every  Bishop  shall  be  chosen  by  the  Clergy  of 
the  District  he  is  to  inspect,  and  revolving  into  the  old  Utopian  Scheme  of 
Bishops  at  large,  which  some  years  ago  was  exploded  by  our  best  and  wisest 
men,  and  condemned  by  us  also.  Srdly.  Whereas  you  say  that  the  majority 
have  sustained  one  officiating  Clergyman's  Letter  of  Petition  as  sufficient  to 
proceed  upon,  this  shows  at  least  that  the  majority  is  not  always  in  the 
right,  since  it  is  absurd  to  say  that  any  majority  can  make  one  to  be  a 
number,  and  so  capable  of  Electing  in  the  sense  of  our  Canons.  Indeed, 
it  looks  like  making  a  jest  of  so  serious  a  matter,  and  must  expose  us  to  the 
derision  of  all  who  hear  it.  4thly.  There  are  2  actual  Presbyters  in  the  Dis- 


800  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

trict  pointed  at,  and  tho  one  of  them  be  not  now  officiating,  nor  famed  for 
his  worth  and  regularity,  yet  he  is  under  no  censure  ;  nay,  he  was  actually 
applied  to  in  the  present  case ;  and  had  he  given  his  vote  as  desired,  no 
doubt  it  would  have  been  sustained.  But,  as  I  am  well  informed,  he  not 
only  refused,  but  has  used  threateniugs  which  may  be  of  dangerous  con 
sequence  to  us  all.  So  that  here  is  Mr.  Lothian's  -  from  Mr.  Lyon's  -f ,  and 
the  remnant  is  0.  Sthly.  Even  Mr.  Lyon's  Petition  was  not  a  regular  and 
voluntary  Deed— there  was  no  Mandate  from  the  Bishops— and,  as  he  owned 
to  me  himself,  it  was  extorted  from  him  by  solicitation  and  authority. 
These  are  such  practices  as  ought  not  to  be  used  or  allowed,  else  there  is  an 
end  of  all  Discipline  and  Order  in  the  Church.  Had  you  given  for  a  reason 
only  your  care  for  continuing  our  Succession,  I  should  have  had  less  to  say 
against  it,  tho  even  that  would  not  have  been  altogether  unexceptionable; 
because  (Othly)  a  body  of  regular  Clergy,  who  have  each  of  them  a  portio 
fircffis,  and  amongst  them  a  large  extent  of  Country  under  their  Charges,  and 
have  been  but  too  long  neglected  and  overlooked  by  us,  have  in  a  regular 
way,  laid  down  to  them  by  ourselves,  for  some  time  past  applied  to  us  for  a 
Mandate  to  elect  a  Bishop  for  themselves,  whose  residence  in  these  parts 
every  considering  person  must  evidently  see  the  advantage  of  to  this  Church, 
and  whose  Promotion  would  have  been  a  fair  and  happy  means  of  increasing 
our  number  and  strengthening  our  union ;  and  yet  this  has  been  most  unjusti 
fiably,  I  think,  refused,  or  for  a  tract  of  time  delayed  by  you.  these 
reasons  have  such  weight  with  me,  that  I  cannot  be  at  "freedom  to  approve 
of  or  concur  in  the  present  measure ;  but  find  myself  obliged,  for  my  own 
exoneration  of  being  accessory  to  so  rash  and  illegal  doings,  to  protest,  as 
with  a  sad  and  sorrowful  heart  I  hereby  do  protest  against  it,  as  unwar 
rantable,  divisive,  and  unjust,  and  an  instance  of  partiality  scarce  to  be 
paralleled  ;  and  desire  that  this  Letter  may  be  recorded  as  a  testimony  of 
my  dissent,  and  that  I  wash  my  hands  of  all  the  evil  consequences  that  may 
ensue  upon  it.  The  above  considerations  might,  I  think,  have  some  weight 
even  with  you  and  my  other  Brethren,  unless  you  are  determined,  in  the 
strength  of  your  majority,  to  go  on  arbitrarily  and  with  a  high  hand.  God 
knows,  I  have,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  all  along  endeavoured  to  serve 
His  Church,  and  avert  any  danger  wherewith  I  saw  it  threatened;  and  now, 
to  prevent  farther  noise,  and  keep  us  firmly  united  in  this  perilous  con 
juncture,  I  would  still  propose  a  short  delay  till  these  Northern  Clergy  have 
made  out  their  Election,  which  may  yet  be  done  before  winter,  and  then 
let  both  go  on  together  for  strengthening  the  Succession ;  and  I  shall  then 
readily  be  present  with  the  first.  This  overture  I  made  to  Bishop  Falcoiiar 
some  months  ago.  Whether  he  communicated  it  I  know  not.  But,  sure  I 
am,  had  it  been  gone  into,  this  affair  would  have  been  over  long  before  now. 
I  cordially  salute  my  Brethren  who  are  to  be  with  you,  and,  praying  God  to 
direct  us  all  into  the  ways  of  peace  and  order,  am,  &c." 

The  above  goes  along  with  this  by  this  day's  Post.  What  effect  it  may 
have  on  others  I  will  not  say,  but  I  hope  it  may  have  some  on  you,  who,  I 
trust,  would  not  chuse  to  be  admitted  in  an  irregular  way,  and  be  the 
cause  of  division,  when,  by  a  very  little  patience,  you  may  come  in  with 
honour  and  applause,  and  be  a  cement  of  union  amongst  us,  which,  God 
grant,  may  never  be  broke,  for  our  dear  Redeemer's  sake.  I  pray  God  to 
bless  and  adorn  you  with  all  the  lovely  graces  of  our  Religion,  and  am,  &c., 

JOHN  ALEXANDER. 


HENRY  EDGAE.  301 

VI. — Bishop  White  to  Her.  IT///.  l'j^l;ijne.      Relatiii'i  to  Mr.  1'^bjnr'n  Promotion. 

E.  D.  Sir, — The  majority  of  the  Bishops  is  now  determined  to  have  Mr. 
Hary  Edgar  soon  promoted  to  the  Episcopate.  A  District  is  in  view  for 
him,  but  yours  were  more  eligible — so  at  least  F.,  E1,  and  I  are  of  opinion. 
It  were  surely  desirable  that  your  destitution  were  supplied  by  a  proper 
Bishop,  a  principle  of  unity,  and  a  visible  Ecclesiastical  head,  a  symbol  of 
J.  ^  C.,  the  invisible  One.  He  who  now  performs  Episcopal  Offices  among 
you,  cannot  lay  claim  to  the  making  up  of  this  defect,  nor  to  exercise  the 
several  powers  that  would  appertain  to  your  fixed  Bishop.  Now,  you  have 
a  fair  opportunity  of  having  this  supplied  by  making  Mr.  Edgar  your  choice, 
which,  if  you  do,  you  need  not  apply  for  a  Mandate,  but,  without  delay,  send 
me  up  an  Address  or  Petition  signifying  that  you  arc  satisfied  with  his  Con 
secration  taking  place,  and  that  in  the  event  of  it,  you  will  receive  him  as 
your  proper  and  fixed  Bishop.  Dear  Sir,  I  intreat  that,  laying  aside  all 
other  attachments,  you  would  bestir  yourself  to  induce  your  two  Brethren 
to  unite  in  gratifying  us  in  what  we  are  so  desirous  of,  and  taking  this 
occasion  to  do  service  to  this  distressed  Church,  the  like  to  which,  perhaps, 
you  may  not  again  have  in  your  power.  I  only  add  that,  to  do  it  to  the 
best  purpose,  your  and  Brethren's  favourable  return  should  be  at  my  hands 
in  two  weeks  from  the  Date  of  this.  I  pray  God  direct  you,  and  incline 
you  and  your  Brethren  to  do  what  is  judged  desirable  for  you,  and  am, 
Your  affectionate  Brother  and  most  humble  Servant, 

(Signed)  BOB.  WHITE. 

Cupar,  14th  Aug.,  1759. 

P.S. — My  thoughts  and  words  above  are  Avritten  in  my  son's  hand,  for 
giving  ease  to  my  eyes.  I  hope  you'll  excuse  this. 

TIL — Her.  William  J''rsk//)u''x  Ileji/i/  In  t/ie  abitre. 

E.  E.  Sir, — Your  Letter  of  the  14th  instant,  inclosed  in  one  from 
Bishop  Falconar  of  the  IGth,  came  to  my  hands  only  yesternight,  acquaint 
ing  me  that  a  majority  of  the  Bishops  are  now  determined  to  have  Mr. 
Edgar  soon  promoted  to  the  Episcopate,  and  that  there  is  a  District  in  view 
for  him,  but  that  Bishops  F.,  B',  and  you,  would  think  ours  more  eligible  ; 
and,  for  this  end,  desiring  that  I  would  bestir  myself  with  my  2  Brethren  to 
induce  them  to  unite  in  petitioning  you  for  his  Consecration,  and  engage 
ourselves  to  receive  him  as  our  Bishop.  And  at  the  same  time  you  tell  me 
that  to  do  this  to  the  best  purpose,  our  Address  should  be  at  your  hands  in 
2  weeks  from  the  Date  of  yours — that  is,  against  the  28th,  which  is  Tuesday, 
and  this  is  Friday.  How,  Sir,  is  this  possible,  even  supposing  us  in  concert 
with  you,  and  as  willing  as  you  could  wish '?  I  can  say  nothing  on  this 
subject  in  name  of  my  Brethren,  tho,  for  myself,  I  beg  leave  to  say,  as  the 
proposal  is  new  to  me,  I  should  like  to  have  more  than  four  days  to  think 
of  the  expediency  of  this  step,  before  I  gave  my  own  consent.  But  as  my 
Congregation  would  likewise  be  interested  in  this  measure,  I  should  think 
myself  very  much  to  blame,  as  no  doubt  they  would,  not  to  pay  a  proper 
regard  to  their  sentiments  in  a  matter  which  so  nearly  concerns  them  and 
me.  Besides,  Sir,  I  take  it  for  granted  from  your  fixing  a  precise  time  for 
our  Answer,  I  should  rather  say  our  Deed  of  Election,  that  you  and  the 
other  2  Bishops  (permit  me  to  say,  by  the  by,  that  I  hope  you  do  not  mean 
exclusively  of  the  other  2  Bishops)  have  agreed  on  a  day  for  Mr.  Edgar's 


802  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

Consecration,  in  consequence  of  the  Election  of  the  Presbyters  of  that  other 
District  which  you  say  is  in  view  for  him,  in  which  case  our  interfering 
would  not  be  altogether  becoming.  You  may  freely  command  me  in  any 
thing  within  my  power  that  concerns  myself  only  ;  but  in  this  affair  I  can  be 
of  no  use  to  you,  for  the  reasons  I  have  given.  I  beg  leave  to  offer  my  kind 
compliments  to  your  Secretary,  and,  begging  your  Benediction,  am,  &c., 

(Signed)  "Wn,.  ERSKYXK. 

2itli  August,  1750. 

VIII.  —  J>i*lio/i  l-'iilnnifii-  In  !!<'/-.  ll'llliiiiii  J-j'xI.-i/nr.      f  >/'  M  i\  J'^li/n  r'n  1'nnnntiou. 

1!.  1).  Sir,  —  Inclosed  you  have  a  Letter  from  the  Primus,  which,  if  the 
purport  of  it  pleases  you,  and  if  it  can  be  done  in  the  manner  he  desires, 
would  give  him  great  satisfaction.  The  time,  you  see,  is  very  short  for 
going  about  what  lie  desires  you  to  do  ;  and,  therefore,  if  the  plan  is  agree 
able  to  you,  you'll  set  about  putting  it  in  practice  forthwith.  I  have  been 
all  this  summer  in  a  very  bad  state  of  health,  and  am  just  now  at  some 
small  distance  from  Town  for  the  sake  of  good  air.  You'll  direct  your 
Letter  for  me  to  the  care  of  Mr.  AVilliam  Bell,  in  Dickson's  Close.  I  can 
not  write  much,  being  still  but  in  a  weakly  condition.  I  wish  you  and  all 
your  concerns  everything  that  is  good  and  agreeable,  and  am,  with  sincere 
regard  and  affection, 

Your  most  humble  Servant, 

(Signed)  AViL.  FALCOXAR. 

Cleland's  Yards,  Aug.  10,  1759. 


IX.  —  lli- 

11.  11.  Sir,  —  I  am  extremely  sorry  to  know  by  yours  of  the  10th  that 
you  arc  distressed,  and  most  sincerely  wish  you  a  speedy  and  perfect 
recovery.  You  will  see,  by  the  inclosed,  part  of  my  sentiments  concerning 
the  proposal  made  me  by  the  Primus,  tho  my  compassion  for  the  age  and 
infirmities  of  the  good  man  have  kept  me  from  being  altogether  so  cxplicite 
as  I  might  otherwise  have  been,  considering  the  style  of  his  Letter,  which  is 
more  than  enough  to  alarm  me,  who  am  so  solicitous  for  harmony  and 
unanimity  amongst  you  Bishops  ;  and  did  not  doubt  of  it  till  now,  that  he 
so  earnestly  desires  me  to  take  this  occasion  to  do  service  to  this  distressed 
Church,  "the  like  to  which,  perhaps,  I  may  not  have  again  in  my  power." 
I  am  absolutely  at  a  loss  what  to  make  of  this.  I  have  for  several  years 
looked  upon  you  as  thoroughly  united,  and  was  thankful  for  it.  The  Pres 
byters,  as  far  as  I  know,  are  entirely  devoted  to  you,  except  a  few  seditious 
firebrands,  who  yet  can  do  you  no  real  hurt  while  you  do  not  divide  among 
yourselves.  But  perhaps  I  am  afraid  where  no  fear  is,  which  I  had  much 
rather  was  the  case,  tho  this  application  of  his,  both  as  to  the  thing  and 
manner  of  it,  surprizes  me.  What  occasion  have  we  for  a  Bishop,  so  long 
as  Mr.  Alexander  is  so  good  as  perform  Episcopal  Acts  among  us,  which 
he  can  do  without  any  great  addition  to  his  expense  of  travelling,  as  he  lias 
Mr.  Grrerne's  Bounds'  and  mine  to  ride  through  before  he  reach  his  own 
District  ?  If  there  was  any  occasion  for  our  having  a  Bishop,  he  is  the 
person  we  would  make  choice  of,  as  upon  all  accounts  the  fittest  ;  and  our 
people,  from  their  acquaintance  with  him,  having  so  much  regard  for  him 
that  the  bare  proposal  of  another  would  give  them  offence  ;  and  I  truly 
think  it  for  our  common  credit  that  this  affair  should  not  be  so  much  as 


HENEY  EDGAE.  803 

hinted  to  them  —  no  more  it  shall.  While  writing  is  troublesome  to  you, 
if  you  have  anything  farther  to  say  to  me  011  this  subject,  you  know  a 
discreet  Lay  friend  of  mine  who  can  be  trusted,  who,  when  you  go  to  Town, 
will  not  grudge  to  write  for  you,  and  who  mentions  you  frequently,  knowing 
that  it  gives  me  a  sensible  pleasure.  I  beg  your  Benediction,  and  am,  Ac., 
Muthil,  Aug.  21,  ITol).  (Signed)  "NYu,.  EESKYXE. 


X.  —  Bishop  Ali:  i'n  i/(l<'/'  t<>  Jjisltoji  ]''(ilc(nitir.      Ht'lntiiuj  to  Mr.   l''<l</<//i'x  Atfidi'. 

II.  II.  I).  Sir,  —  Your  Letter  of  the  7th  came  safe,  and  next  Post  brought 
me  one  from  A.  II.,  inviting  me  to  meet  you  and  him  at  the  Ferry,  to  which 
I  have  made  no  Answer,  nor  do  I  intend  it  ;  but,  if  you  please,  yoii  may 
give  my  service  to  him,  and  tell  him  from  me  that  I  wish  him  very  well,  but 
chuse  not  to  enter  upon  a  new  negotiation  with  him,  either  by  Conference  or 
writing.  To  yourself,  I  say  I  repent  I  ever  did,  as  it  is  now  clearer  to  me 
than  light  itself,  that  they  have  no  other  intention  in  these  than  to  worm 
something  out  of  us  that  may  serve  them  for  a  handle  to  expose  and  abuse 
us.  As  to  your  overture  of  my  going  to  Cupar,  I  am  sorry  I  can't  close 
with  it  in  the  manner  you  propose.  I  hope  my  Brethren  are  all  men  of 
probity  and  virtue,  which  makes  me  suspect  my  own  judgment  when  it 
differs  from  theirs  ;  yet  its  dictates  must  be  my  rule  till  I  am  otherways 
convinced.  I  ask  then,  why  all  this  hurry  to  advance  H.  E.'?  Surely  to 
keep  up  the  Succession  is  but  a  vain  pretence  ;  for,  had  the  same  zeal 
appeared  since  the  first  application  of  the  Northern  Clergy,  that  might  have 
been  done,  and  even  he  advanced  before  this  time.  The  Succession  lyes 
as  near  my  heart  as  it  can  do  yours  —  many  an  anxious  thought  and  waking 
hour  it  gives  me  :  and  to  keep  up  our  Order  is  a  duty  incumbent  upon  us 
all.  But  then  it  should  be  done  in  an  orderly  way.  You  talk  of  a  call  of 
Providence,  and,  no  doubt,  Providence  calls  us  to  do  our  duty  at  all  times  ; 
but  it  never  calls  us  to  do  a  thing  of  the  legality  of  which  we  do  but  doubt. 
Such  may  be  a  temptation,  and  not  a  call  from  Heaven.  Consider,  Sir,  you 
reject  the  call  of  Providence,  which  is  manifestly  on  the  side  of  these  Clergy 
whom  \ou  despise.  There  we  see  a  sett  of  regular  Clergymen,  who  have  a 
considerable  i/i/rt/o  i/r<>//ix,  a  large  extent  of  Country  under  their  Charge,  who 
have  long  been  destitute  and  neglected  by  us,  addressing  us  in  a  Canonical 
way  —  a  way  laid  down  to  them  by  ourselves  —  to  have  a  Bishop  set  over 
them  ;  and  many  excellent  ends  such  a  settlement  would  serve.  So  that  I 
think,  instead  of  upbraiding  them  for  not  doing  this  sooner,  and  therefore 
slighting  their  suit,  we  should  have  been  thankful  to  God,  who,  by  His  grace, 
had  now  put  it  into  their  minds,  and  in  His  good  Providence  had  thereby 
given  us  so  fair  and  so  happy  an  opportunity  of  continuing  our  Order  in  a 
lawful  way.  YVe  ought  to  have  met  them  more  than  halfway,  and  done 
everything  to  encourage  them.  Had  the  same  circumstances  appeared  in 
the  affair  of  H.  1'].,  I  should  have  been  the  first  to  have  assisted;  but,  on  the 
reverse,  we  there  discern  every  contrary  symptom,  so  that  they  must  be 
blind  indeed,  who  cannot  here  behold  partiality  and  injustice  in  the  highest 
degree.  [Here  your  Letter  of  the  llth,  with  its  inclosed  from  the  Primus, 
conies  in,  takes  off  the  veil,  and  makes  a  new  and  unexpected  discovery.] 
Alas,  for  our  poor  Mother  !  but  woe,  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence 
cometh  !  Pardon  this  extasy,  which  I  was  not  able  to  restrain.  But  to 
return.  Our  Canons,  in  '81  and  '48,  provide  that  every  Election  shall  be 
made  by  the  Clergy  of  the  District  ;  but  our  wise  majority,  it  seems,  have 


804  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

found  out  and  sustained  one  to  be  a  number.  These  Canons  say  that  a 
Mandate  shall  be  issued  from  the  Primus  and  all  the  Bishops,  impowering 
to  Elect ;  but  here  the  Primus,  or  rather  the  Primus'  son,  elicites  a  Letter 
of  Petition  from  one,  and  would  palm  it  upon  our  understanding  as  a  Deed 
of  Election  from  many.  I  have  not  now  time  to  enumerate  the  absurdities 
with  which  this  scheme  is  pregnant,  as  the  Post  hurries,  and  I  must  hasten 
to  conclude.  Perhaps  more  of  them  may  meet  you  at  Cupar,  if  this  scheme 
go  on.  But  I  hope  for  better  things  of  H.  E.,  and  that  he  will  not,  for  want 
of  a  little  patience,  by  so  apparent  an  <nnl>itii*,  give  Pi.  E.,  upon  the  compari 
son,  so  great  an  advantage  over  him  ;  and  that  my  Brethren  will  think 
better  before  they  make  the  fatal  breach,  especially  as  it  may  be  so  easily 
prevented,  and  the  thing  yet  perfected  in  due  time  before  winter,  by  doing 
justice  to  the  Northern  Clergy.  Eor  tlu">  you  say  they  will  adhere  to  their 
old  Church,  and  not  clmsc  one  of  themselves,  that  you  cannot  be  certain  of 
till  the  experiment  is  made,  which  may  soon  be  done,  and  the  Schism 
prevented ;  for,  if  they  are  obstinate  not  to  chuse  another,  it  will  still  be 
time  enough  for  this  measure  to  take  place,  and  we  then  can  do  it  at  least 
with  more  show  of  consistency  and  justice.  Meantime,  if  this  pleases,  I 
shall  write  to  (r.  to  advise  them  either  immediately  to  Elect  one  of  them 
selves,  or  refer  the  Election  to  us.  And  I  am  assured  by  those  that  know 
them,  that  both  Taylor  and  Stewart  are  sufficient  men,  and  either  of  them, 
being  on  the  spot,  can  do  more  service  than  they  who  live  at  a  remote  dis 
tance  ;  for  I  take  doing  service  in  his  station  ought  as  much  to  be  con 
sidered  in  making  a  Bishop,  as  barely  keeping  up  an  Order  of  Drones,  who 
have  nothing  to  do  but  continue  themselves  ;  and  this  was  the  opinion  of  our 
best  men  not  many  years  ago,  not  to  say  of  ourselves.  You  are  pleased  to 
desire  I  may  not  alter  my  good  opinion  of  you.  I  answer  that  indeed 
entirely  depends  upon  yourself,  and  that  so  long  as  you  act  a  consistent 
part,  I  shall  not  fail  to  continue,  II.  l\.  1).  Sir,  yours,  &c., 

Friday,  August  17.  JOHN  ALEXANDER. 

P.S. — Notwithstanding  all  the  haste  I  could  make,  the  Friday's  Post 
was  gone  before  this  could  reach  the  Office,  to  which  I  shall  make  no  other 
addition  than  to  observe  that  in  one  of  your  Letters  I  think  you  make  too 
light  of  the  Boss  Election  when  you  say,  "  Let  the  Primus  and  these  gentle 
men  discuss  the  matter  betwixt  them  ;"  for  you  and  every  one  of  us  have  as 
much  concern  in  that  matter  as  the  Primus.  And  if  he  is  negligent  in  his 
Office,  it  is  provided  by  our  Canons,  I  think,  that  you,  as  next  senior,  do 
issue  a  Mandate,  to  be  Signed  by  the  other  Bishops,  for  their  Meeting  to 
Elect ;  which  therefore,  if  he  refuses,  I  desire  you  may  do  with  all  expedition. 
Once  more,  I  would  have  you  look  again  before  you  leap,  and  think  what  a 
precipice  this  young  phaeton  is  like  to  drive  you  upon.  And  if  you  appre 
hend  your  change  to  be  so  near,  what  a  sad  legacy  you  are  like  to  leave  to 
this  poor  Church!  what  a  glorious  monument  to  yourself!  All  this  in 
friendship  ;  perhaps  I  may  never  be  so  free  again. 

This  Letter  has  had  a  strange  luck.  The  Post  now  brings  in  yours  of 
the  18th,  to  which  I  can  say  no  more,  but  refer  you  to  the  above. 

Monday,  August  20. 

XI. — Of  Bishop  Edi/ar's  Consecration.     Wlmt  passed  at  it  about  the  Ross  Affair. 

D.  Sir, — Receive  your  Papers  for  a  new  supply.     What  follows  is  a 

succinct  detail  of  what  has  past  with  regard  to  H.  Edgar's  Consecration. 


HENRY  EDGAR.  sor, 

The  Pr.  wrote  me,  of  Septr.  18th,  his  design  of  inviting  that  Brother  to  be 
his  Coadjutor,  and  desiring  my  concurrence  in  case  he  accepted.  It  was 
Post  day,  the  28th,  that  I  received  it,  when  I  immediately  wrote  to  G.  for 
advice  ;  which  was — "you  need,  in  my  opinion,  have  no  difficulty  nor  make 
any  struggle  in  gratifying  the  Pr.,  &c.'"  P.S.,  he  says,  "the  only  objection 
we  could  make  would  he  that  the  Northern's  should  be  first  served  ;  but 
that,  I  suppose,  would  be  overruled."  On  this  I  wrote  to  the  Pr.,  8th  Oct., 
telling  him  I  had  wrote  to  G.  for  his  opinion,  and  we  were  both  ready  to 
concur  with  the  design  of  H.  E.'s  being  his  Coadjutor,  as  I  hoped  he  would 
be  in  doing  justice  to  the  Kossians.  Of  the  same  Date  the  Pr.  writes  me 
again  that  he  had  made  the  above  offer  to-  II.  E.,  which  he  supposed  he 
would  embrace,  tho  he  said  nothing ;  and  when  the  day  was  fixed  he  hoped 
I  would  attend.  Before  I  answered  this,  I  had  another  from  G.,  of  October 
12th,  expressing  great  uneasiness  lest  his  last  should  have  inclined  me  to 
follow  the  rash,  unadvised  counsel  he  had  then  given  ;  for  by  Letters  to  him 
from  both  the  Pr.  and  F.,  it  was  now  evident  to  him  that  the  Pr.  would 
"quickly  accomplish  all  his  designs."  I  could  not,  however,  now  draw 
back ;  only  told  the  Pr.  in  my  Answer  to  him,  that  it  was  not  for  me  to 
make  such  a  journey  at  this  season  of  the  year  upon  a  bare  supposal ;  and 
therefore,  before  I  set  out,  wanted,  by  a  written  Certificate  from  both,  that 
the  one  had  given  and  the  other  accepted  the  Coadjutorship,  as  I  would  not, 
tliu  on  the  spot,  join  in  Consecrating  a  Bishop  at  large.  Before  mine  could 
reach  him,  there  comes  another  from  the  Pr..  of  October  inth,  appointing 
All  Saints  for  the  day  of  Consecration.  By  this  time  I  understood  that  G., 
in  his  Answer  to  the  Pr.,  had  refused  his  concurrence  with  the  scheme,  and 
in  some  sort  protested  against,  unless  a  Mandate,  were  issued  to  the  Eoss 
Brethren.  I  therefore,  in  my  Answer  to  AY.,  of  October  11),  told  him  that  I 
thought  it  most  reasonable  he  should  be  gratitied  in  this  so  just  a  demand  ; 
that  I  was  resolved  not  to  desert  him,  nor  would  I  join  in  hiving  my  hands 
upon  any  person  till  such  Mandate  was  first  agreed  to  ;  and'  that  I  waited 
his  Answer  to  this  before  I  set  out,  as  there  was  time  enough  for  it.  In  his 
Return,  which  was  sent  open  to  F.,  and  inclosed  by  him.  after  urging  me 
strongly  to  attend,  he  says — "  Concerning  the  Mandate  to  Boss,  I  entertain 
such  scruples  as  I  cannot  get  over,  and  therefore  must  defer  saying  anything 
of  it  till  we  have  the  happiness  of  meeting."  lie  also  assured  me  that  he 
was  to  be  Coadjutor,  and  no  Bishop  at  large.  F.  says- — "I  have  suggested 
to  the  Pr.  the  wrong  of  keeping  back  a  Mandate.  I  hope  we  shall  prevail 
with  our  Brethren,  and  am  persuaded  that  Mr.  Edgar  will  be  a  means  of 
making  us  all  agree  ;"  and  in  a  posterior  Letter  pressed  me  most  earnestly 
with  fair  promises,  &c.  In  my  Answer  to  which,  I  told  him  my  resolution 
was  fixed  not  to  desert  G.,  who  had  wrote  me  of  the  2;:'d  that  he  was  fully 
resolved  never  to  countenance  or  consent  to  any  more  Consecrations  in 
whatever  shape,  till  a  Mandate  be  issued  of  justice  done  to  those  hitherto  so 
neglected  and  provoked  Northern  Presbyters  :  and  I  mentioned  to  him, 
according  to  your  proposal,  his  making  a  bold  stand,  and  threatening  to 
withdraw  if  this  was  refused. 

Thus  matters  stood  when  I  set  out,  October  31,  for  Cupar,  where  I 
found  all  Chapterly  convened.  After  some  general  conversation,  I  called  F. 
aside,  and  asked  him  what  progress  he  had  made,  or  how  matters  stood  with 
the  Brethren.  lie  said  they  would  listen  to  nothing,  nor  hear  of  a  Mandate. 
Then,  said  I,  you  have  brought  me  into  this  snare  and  betrayed  me  ;  but  it 
VOL.  IT.  2  o 


804  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

found  out  and  sustained  one  to  bo  a  number.  These  Canons  say  that  a 
Mandate  shall  be  issued  from  the  Primus  and  all  the  Bishops,  impowering 
to  Elect ;  but  here  the  Primus,  or  rather  the  Primus'  son,  elicites  a  Letter 
of  Petition  from  one,  and  would  palm  it  upon  our  understanding  as  a  Deed 
of  Election  from  many.  I  have  not  now  time  to  enumerate  the°absurdities 
with  which  this  scheme  is  pregnant,  as  the  Post  hurries,  and  I  must  hasten 
to  conclude.  Perhaps  more  of  them  may  meet  you  at  Cupar,  if  this  scheme 
go  on.  But  I  hope  for  better  things  of  II.  E.,  and  that  he  will  not,  for  want 
of  a  little  patience,  by  so  apparent  an  <iin!>ihi*,  give  E.  F.,  upon  the  compari 
son,  so  groat  an  advantage  over  him  ;  and  that  my  Brethren  will  think 
better  before  they  make  the  fatal  breach,  especially  as  it  may  be  so  easily 
prevented,  and  the  thing  yet  perfected  in  due  time 'before  winter,  by  doing 
justice  to  the  Northern  Clergy.  For  thu  you  say  they  Avill  adhere  to  their 
old  Church,  and  not  chusc  one  of  themselves,  that  you  cannot  be  certain  of 
till  the  experiment  is  made,  which  may  soon  be  done,  and  the  Schism 
prevented ;  for,  if  they  are  obstinate  not  to  chusc  another,  it  will  still  be 
time  enough  for  this  measure  to  take  place,  and  we  then  can  do  it  at  least 
with  more  show  of  consistency  and  justice.  Meantime,  if  this  pleases,  I 
shall  write  to  Cr.  to  advise  them  either  immediately  to  Elect  one  of  them 
selves,  or  refer  the  Election  to  us.  And  I  am  assured  by  those  that  know 
them,  that  both  Taylor  and  Stewart  are  sufficient  men,  and  either  of  them, 
being  on  the  spot,  can  do  more  service  than  they  who  live  at  a  remote  dis 
tance  ;  for  I  take  doing  service  in  his  station  "ought  as  much  to  be  con 
sidered  in  making  a  Bishop,  as  barely  keeping  up  an  Order  of  Drones,  Avho 
have  nothing  to  do  but  continue  themselves  ;  and  this  was  the  opinion  of  our 
best  men  not  many  years  ago,  not  to  say  of  ourselves.  You  are  pleased  to 
desire  I  may  not  alter  my  good  opinion  of  you.  I  answer  that  indeed 
entirely  depends  upon  yourself,  and  that  so  long  as  you  act  a  consistent 
part,  I  shall  not  fail  to  continue,  II.  II.  1).  Sir,  yours,  &c., 

Friday,  August  17.  JOHN  ALEXANDER. 

P. S.— Notwithstanding  all  the  haste  1  could  make,  the  Friday's  Post 
was  gone  before  this  could  reach  the  Office,  to  which  I  shall  make  no  other 
addition  than  to  observe  that  in  one  of  your  Letters  I  think  you  make  too 
light  of  the  Pioss  Election  when  you  say,  "Let  the  Primus  and  these  gentle 
men  discuss  the  matter  betwixt  them  ;'"  for  you  and  every  one  of  us  have  as 
much  concern  in  that  matter  as  the  Primus.  And  if  he  is  negligent  in  his 
Office,  it  is  provided  by  our  Canons,  I  think,  that  you,  as  next  senior,  do 
issue  a  Mandate,  to  be  Signed  by  the  other  Bishops,  for  their  Meeting  to 
Elect ;  which  therefore,  if  he  refuses,  I  desire  you  may  do  with  all  expedition. 
Once  more,  I  would  have  you  look  again  before  you  leap,  and  think  what  a 
precipice  this  young  phaeton  is  like  to  drive  you  upon.  And  if  you  appre 
hend  your  change  to  be  so  near,  what  a  sad  legacy  you  are  like  to  leave  to 
this  poor  Church!  Avhat  a  glorious  monument  to  yourself!  All  this  in 
friendship  ;  perhaps  I  may  never  be  so  free  again. 

This  Letter  has  had  a  strange  luck.  The  Post  now  brings  in  yours  of 
the  18th,  to  which  I  can  say  no  more,  but  refer  you  to  the  above. 

Monday,  August  20. 

XI. — Of  /J/.sVii^  Edijar's  Consecration.     Wltat  paused  at  it  about  the  Ross  Affair. 

D.  Sir, — Pieceive  your  Papers  for  a  new  supply.     What  follows  is  a 

succinct  detail  of  what  has  past  with  regard  to  H. 'Edgar's  Consecration. 


HENRY  EDGAR.  CO/5 

The  Pr.  wrote  me,  of  Septr.  18th,  his  design  of  inviting  that  Brother  to  be 
his  Coadjutor,  and  desiring  my  concurrence  in  case  he  accepted.  It  was 
Post  day,  the  28th,  that  I  received  it,  when  I  immediately  wrote  to  G.  for 
advice  ;  which  was — "you  need,  in  my  opinion,  have  no  difficulty  nor  make 
any  struggle  in  gratifying  the  Pr.,  <tc."  P.S.,  he  says,  "the  only  objection 
we  could,  make  would  be  that  the  Northern's  should  be  first  served  ;  but 
that,  I  suppose,  would  be  overruled."  On  this  I  wrote  to  the  Pr.,  8th  Oct., 
telling  him  I  had  wrote  to  G.  for  his  opinion,  and  we  were  both  ready  to 
concur  with  the  design  of  II.  E.'s  being  his  Coadjutor,  as  I  hoped  he  would 
be  in  doing  justice  to  the  Rossians.  Of  the  same  Date  the  Pr.  writes  me 
again  that  he  had  made  the  above  offer  to-  II.  E.,  which  he  supposed  he 
would  embrace,  tho  he  said  nothing;  and  when  the  day  was  fixed  he  hoped 
I  would  attend.  P>eforc  I  answered  this,  I  had  another  from  G.,  of  October 
12th,  expressing  great  uneasiness  lest  his  last  should  have  inclined  me  to 
follow  the  rash,  unadvised  counsel  he  had  then  given  ;  for  by  Letters  to  him 
from  both  the  Pr.  and  I\,  it  was  now  evident  to  him  that  the  Pr.  would 
"quickly  accomplish  all  his  designs."  I  could  not,  however,  now  draw 
back  ;  only  told  the  Pr.  in  my  Answer  to  him,  that  it  was  not  for  me  to 
make  such  a  journey  at  this  season  of  tho  year  upon  a  bare  supposal ;  and 
therefore,  before  I  set  out,  wanted,  by  a  written  Certificate  from  both,  that 
the  one  had  given  and  the  other  accepted  the  Coadjutorship,  as  I  would  not, 
tin")  on  the  .spot,  join  in  Consecrating  a  P>ishop  at  large.  Before  mine  could 
reach  him,  there  comes  another  from  the  Pr..  of  October  loth,  appointing 
All  Saints  for  the  day  of  Consecration.  By  this  time  I  understood  that  G., 
in  his  Answer  to  the  Pr.,  had  refused  his  concurrence  with  the  scheme,  and 
in  some  sort  protested  against,  unless  a  Mandate,  were  issued  to  the  Ross 
Brethren.  I  therefore,  in  my  Answer  to  "\V.,  of  October  10,  told  him  that  I 
thought  it  most  reasonable  he  should  bo  gratified  in  this  so  just  a  demand; 
that  I  was  resolved  not  to  desert  him,  nor  would  I  join  in  laying  my  hands 
upon  any  person  till  such  Mandate  was  first  agreed  to;  and  that  I  waited 
his  Answer  to  this  before  I  set  out,  as  there  was  time  enough  for  it.  In  his 
Return,  which  was  sent  open  to  E.,  and  inclosed  by  him,  after  urging  me 
strongly  to  attend,  he  says — "  Concerning  the  Mandate  to  Ross,  I  entertain 
such  scruples  as  I  cannot  get  over,  and  therefore  must  defer  saying  anything 
of  it  till  we  have  the  happiness  of  meeting."  lie  also  assured  me  that  he 
was  to  be  Coadjutor,  and  no  Bishop  at  large.  E.  says — "I  have  suggested 
to  the  Pr.  the  wrong  of  keeping  back  a  Mandate.  I  hope  we  shall  prevail 
with  our  Brethren,  and  am  persuaded  that  Mr.  Edgar  will  be  a  means  of 
making  us  all  agree  ;"  and  in  a  posterior  Letter  pressed  me  most  earnestly 
with  fair  promises,  &c.  In  my  Answer  to  which,  I  told  him  my  resolution 
was  fixed  not  to  desert  G.,  who  had  wrote  me  of  the  2;;U1  that  he  was  fully 
resolved  never  to  countenance  or  consent  to  any  more  Consecrations  in 
whatever  shape,  till  a  Mandate  be  issued  of  justice  done  to  those  hitherto  so 
neglected  and  provoked  Northern  Presbyters  ;  and  I  mentioned  to  him, 
according  to  your  proposal,  his  making  a  bold  stand,  and  threatening  to 
withdraw  if  this  was  refused. 

Thus  matters  stood  when  I  set  out,  October  31,  for  Cupar,  where  I 
found  all  Chapterly  convened.  After  some  general  conversation,  I  called  F. 
aside,  and  asked  him  what  progress  he  had  made,  or  how  matters  stood  with 
the  Brethren.  lie  said  they  would  listen  to  nothing,  nor  hear  of  a  Mandate. 
Then,  said  I,  you  have  brought  me  into  this  snare  and  betrayed  me  ;  but  it 
VOL.  IT.  2  Q 


30G  DISTRICT  OF  FIFE. 

shall  not  avail,  for,  bo  the  consequence  as  it  will,  if  the  Mandate  is  not 
granted,  I  set  out  to-morrow  morning  in  my  return  to  whence  I  came.  He 
used  all  the  persuasion  he  was  master  of  to  make  me  drop  insisting,  but 
in  vain.  I  desired  him  to  call  in  Mr.  E. ;  but  he  was  in  the  same  time,  and 
to  my  no  small  surprize,  in  the  whole  conversation,  showed  an  unbecoming 
vehemence,  which  I  thought  savoured  too  much  of  the  ainbiittv  which  a  wise 
man  would  rather  have  striven  to  conceal ;  insomuch  that  I  was  obliged  to 
give  him  a  gcnile  check — "  Mr.  E.,  how  come  you  to  express  such  keenness  ? 
I  expected  you  was  to  be  a  reconciler;  sure  you  have  no  vote  in  our  consul- 
.tations  as  yet?''  lie  stood  a  little  abashed  at  this,  and  attempted  an 
apology,  an  I  indeed  seemed  more  moderate,  at  least  was  more  silent 
after.  You  may  judge  what  a  trial  I  underwent  with  the  other  2,  who 
like  tygers  set  upon  me,  and  I  was  soundly  catechised.  How  came  I  to 
dictate  ?  "What  connexion  had.  the  Mandate  with  the  end  of  the  Meeting? 
Why  at  this  time?  Why  (1.  prompt  the  Northern's?  &e.  Many  "'whys" 
I  got,  but  little  room  to  speak  for  noise  ;  but  stuck  to  my  point.  At  last  the 
old  Tvrani  began  to  charge  me  as  if  I  had  been  guilty  of  some  crime,  upon 
which  I  arose  in  warmth  and  went  up  to  him.  '•  Now,  Sir,  you  accuse  me 
•  my  Brethren,  &c.,  of  something  you  will  not  speak  out;  but  I  insist 
you  shall,  that  I  may  have  opportunity  either  to  vindicate  myself  or  submit 
to  censure,  as  your  proof  comes  out ;  for  I  will  not  sit  with  such  abuse." 
lie  was  something  perplexed  at  this,  and  his  heart  failed  him.  He  would 
tell  niG  bei'ore  we  parted.  "No,  Sir,  now  is  the  time,  and  the  accusation 
was  public."  And  what  was  the  great  affair  when  it  came  out  ?  Why 
because  they  said  I  would  not  promote  the  Election  for  Dunblane.  I  durst 
not  give  the  true  reason,  but  told  them  I  would  not  push  a  thing  which  I 
well  knew  would  not  only  be  in  vain  but  perhaps  might  be  dangerous ;  for 
they  well  enough  knew  the  Laity  in  these  parts  was  not  to  be  meddled  with. 
"  Well,  but  why  not  advise  the  Clergy  ?"  I  said  I  had  proposed  it  to  them, 
but  they  would  do  nothing  without  the  Laity's  consent,  and  that  they  would 
not  venture  to  ask.  I  might  have  added  that  the  Candidate  was  far  from 
being  their  choice  ;  that  he,  who  was  once  connected  to  some,  and  Puiit  to 
others,  might  be  presumed  to  have  more  weight  with  them  than  I :  why 
then  should  I  bear  the  blame  ?  But  since  this  was  all,  I  dropt  it,  as  not 
worth  contending  about,  and  returned  to  the  Mandate,  insisting  that  as  F. 
and  I  had  never  seen  the  Address  for  it,  it  should  be  produced.  James  was 
sent  to  seek  it  once  and  again,  but  it  could  not  be  found.  1  persisted,  and 
at  last  it  comes  out — a  very  becoming,  well-worded  Paper.  Then  the  Date 
is  examined — September  7th,  1758.  "Why,  says  I,  has  the  Mandate  not 
been  granted  before  this,  11  months  being  near  elapsed?  He  said  he  had 
some  scruples  which  he  could  not  satisfy  himself  about.  But  why  then  did 
you  not  communicate  them  to  your  Brethren,  and  take  their  advice,  who  were 
equally  concerned  ?  This  could  admit  of  no  answer.  But  what,  asked  I, 
are  those  scruples  ?  or  why  after  so  long  delay  should  they  now  be  refused  ? 
As  we  were  all  met,  and  could  Sign  at  once,  whereas  by  circular  Subscrip 
tions  much  time  would  be  lost ;  and  by  doing  the  thing  now  we  might  all 
be  united,  for  I  should  undertake  that  Of.  should  adhere  to  the  Consecration 
if  we  issued  the  Mandate  ;  if  we  did  not  I  behoved  to  depart  re  infect <i,  for  I 
would  not  desert  him.  Rait,  snarling,  said,  much  better  I  had  not  come. 
True,  said  I,  bat  I  told  the  Pr.  beforehand  what  I  would  insist  on,  and  yet 
he  urged  my  coming,  so  that  I  have  been  trepanned  in  the  whole  affair. 


HENRY  EDGAR.  807 

Tho  Pr.  began  to  bluster  again — "Why,  let  him  go.  And  Iraly  I  AY  ill  go, 
said  I,  if  my  terms  are  not  granted.  Here  observe  that  when  F.  and  I  Avcre 
together,  I  told  him  it  Avas  in  his  power  to  bring  them  to  terms.  As  IIOAV '? 
said  he.  Even  by  openly  declaring  that  you  would  not  concur  in  the  Con 
secration  unless  the  Mandate  be  granted.  Then,  said  he,  they  Avould  fly 
off,  and  a  breach  would  happen.  You  need  not  at  all  be  afraid  of  that, 
answered  I;  take  my  word  for  once.  AYcll,  tho  he  had  given  me  no  assis 
tance  hitherto,  except  in  calling  for  the  Address  (F.  here  interposed),  indeed 
I  think  that  by  our  Rules  we  cannot  be  accountable  for  refusing  a  Mandate 
after  so  long  delay.  I  instantly  caught  hold  of  this,  and  as  I  had  before, 
been. bullied  by  Rl  with  the  word  "majority" — Now,  Brethren,  said  I,  I  put 
it  upon  your  own  footing:  here  is  an  evident  majority  for  a  Mandate — F., 
G.,  and  I — and  therefore  I  require  it  of  you.  Then  the  scruples  came  out, 
and  what  were  these  '?  AYhy,  truly,  the  Northerns  had  taken  upon  them, 
Avithout  our  authority,  to  unite  the  Districts  of  Ross  and  Caithness.  This 
looked  like  fishing  for  faults.  I  told  them  if  that  Avas  any  crime,  I  Avas  sure 
it  Avas  a  sin  of  ignorance  in  them,  Avho,  I  Avas  persuaded,  intended  us  no 
affront ;  but  R:  AYOiild  hear  of  nothing  to  be  done  till  they  should  first 
ackuoAvledgc  their  fault.  So  AYC  Averc  ///  y.tntu  qnn,  and  no  medium  like  to  be 
found,  till  at  last  the  Primus  stumbled  upon  one  Avhich  ended  all,  and  it 
Avas  this — That  he  should  immediately  Avrite  to  the  Rossians,  telling  them 
their  error,  and  desiring  them  to  acknowledge  it ;  that  in  consideration  of 
their  Address,  the  Bishops  had  now  united  the  '2  Districts,  and  Signed  a 
Mandate  to  them  to  Elect  a  Bishop  to  themselves,  Avhich  Avas  lodged  in  his 
hand,  immediately  to  be  transmitted  to  them  upon  the  receipt  of  their  Letter 
of  acknoAvlcdgment . 

Thus  matters  Avere  compromised,  and  I  Avas  glad  to  come  in,  as  I  could 
not  make  a  better  of  it.  The  rest  of  the  evening  the  Pr.,  on  one  side  of  the  fire, 
sat  in  an  elbow  chair  telling  old  stories,  and  F.,  on  the  other,  echoed  back  his 
applause  ;  Avhilc  Rait  and  I,  in  the  same  opposition,  sate  entirely  mute  ;  for 
indeed  I  Avas  umvell,  as  the  long  ride  had  brought  on  my  gravel.  After  supper 
I  left  them  andAvent  to  my  quarters,  and  next  day  the  Papers  Averc  extended 
and  Signed  after  the  Consecration.  Immediately  before,  I  took  II.  E.  aside 
and  asked  whether  he  Avas  satisfied  to  accept  of  being  Coadjutor  to  AY.  Yes, 
he  said,  but  his  friends  advised  him  also  to  accept  of  GlasgOAV.  as  he  might 
be  of  some  use.  But,  Sir,  said  I,  I  concur  in  your  Consecration  only  as 
Coadjutor  to  W. ;  and  had  time  to  say  no  more.  After  it  Avas  over,  "W. 
began  to  move  the  same  thing — Might  lie  not  be  appointed  upon  D.  L.'s 
Petition  ?  I  told  them  I  had  already  given  my  reasons  against  that,  and 
Avas  not  prepared  for  the  question ;  they  might  do  as  they  pleased.  So  it 
Avas  dropped ;  but  as  no  Certificate  of  the  Ordination  was  offered  to  me  to 
be  Signed,  I  suspect  the  majority  has  sustained  the  thing.  And  let  them 
even  be  doing,  I  cannot  help  them  ;  and  trust  I  shall  never  have  so  much 
dealing  Avith  them  again,  as  I  see  'tis  only  giving  myself  pain,  and  submit 
ting  to  all  manner  of  indignities  from  the  supercilious  pride  of  fiery  and 
capricious  men,  to  no  manner  of  purpose.  II.  E.  Avill,  I  find,  be  a  tamperer 
for  the  Edinrs;  and  F.  (who  has  them  so  much  at  heart)  and  he  Avill,  I'm 
afraid,  play  mischief.  R*  brought  R.  F.  upon  the  carpet,  and  many  silly, 
huffy  things  he  said  of  him.  I  told  him  that  Avas  not  properly  a  matter  of  our 
present  deliberation,  nor  were  AVO  to  examine  objections  till  AVC  kiicA-v  Avlio  the 
person  returned  A\Tas,  lest  Ave  might  be  found  to  Avound  characters  fighting 


808  DISTIMCI  OF  FIFE. 

with  our  own  shadows.  Ho,  however,  would  have  the  Mandate  clogged, 
and  F.  joined  Jiim,  with  one  of  their  own  number  or  near  neighbourhood, 
who  might  be  most  serviceable  to  them.  If  11.  F.  is  returned,  it  will  be  a 
new  sijuabble,  for  F.  will  desert  him  unless  he  goes  north,  and  E.'s  vote  will 
be  sustained,  thu  he  ought  to  have  none  ;  and  I  could  observe  him  Sign  the 
Mandate,  which  he  had  no  title  to  do.  But  I  took  no  notice,  I  had 
contended  enough  to  little  purpose.  We  parted  decently,  and  I  came  back 
to  Falkland  that  night,  and  next  day  arrived  here  in  health  f  1>.  G.  j  I  must 
beg  you  to  return  these  hasty  scrapes,  as  my  memory  is  very  treacherous, 
and  I  have  no  time  to  transcribe,  nor  to  add  more,  but  that  I  ever  am,  &c., 
Alloa,  Nov.  !),  175!).  JOHN  ALEXANDER. 

P.S. — F.  lias  stood  liis  ground,  and  would  not  agree  with  the  other  two 
to  have  Glasgow  in  the  Commission. 


11.  li.  ].).  Sir, — Tlin  I  have  had  no  Answer  to  the  Line  I  wrote  you  upon 
my  return  fVom  Cupar,  I  reckon  myself  bound  in  justice  both  to  you  and 
myself  to  lay  before  you  what  I  learn  by  a  Letter  last  week  from  G., 
inclosing  one  tVom  the  Primus,  wrote  by  his  son's  hand,  Xovr.  2nd,  when  I 
suppose  you  were  present ;  but,  in  case  you  was  not,  I  transcribe  the  follow 
ing  paragraph  from  the  Original  now  before  me: — "Yesterday  being  the 
Feast  of  All  Saints,  Mr.  Fdgar  was  Consecrated  here — all  your  Brethren 
being  present  and  concurring.  You  know  that,  supposing  Mr.  Edgar  would 
not  accept  of  Glasgow,  I  proposed  he  should  be  Coadjutor  to  me,  but, 
previous  to  his  Consecration,  he  declared  himself  willing  to  accept  of  that 
District,  to  which  F.  and  It.  most  heartily  assented,  and  A.,  when  I  spoke 
of  it  to  him,  said  repeatedly  we  might  do  in  it  as  we  pleased.  But  he  going 
off  in  a  hurry,  without  giving  time  for  expeding  forms,  nothing  more  was 
done  while  he  was  present,  which  being  the  case,  we  did  not  chuse  to  go 
farther  without  attainting  you  and  having  your  opinion,  tho  F.  and  E.  think 
with  me,  and  have  desired  me  to  tell  you  so,  that  it  should  be  immediately 
appointed  for  him  as  his  Charge,  and  he  recognized  and  confirmed  in  it." 
Now,  Sir,  I  only  ask — Is  this  the  way  to  maintain  peace  among  us  ?  Is 
this  a  just  representation  of  my  words'?  This  serves  indeed  to  explain  the 
secret  of  training  me  to  Cupar,  per  A/s  tint  ixi'ox,  to  make  me  subservient  to 
their  anomalous  designs.  You  might  observe,  and  he  will  not  deny,  that 
before  his  Consecration  I  asked  Mr.  Edgar  whether  he  was  willing  to  accept 
of  being  Coadjutor  to  "\Y.  He  answered  he  was,  but  his  friends  thought  he 
might  be  useful  also  in  Glasgow;  but,  said  I,  remember  I  concur  in  your 
Consecration,  as  you  are  to  be  Coadjutor  to  "W.  only.  After  the  Consecra 
tion,  Avhen  W.  moved  his  being  appointed  to  Glasgow,  you  heard  me  say 
that  upon  the  faith  of  his  Letter  I  had  come  thither  to  assist  in  Consecrating 
a  Coadjutor  to  him,  and  in  that  shape  only  I  had  concurred.  Upon  his 
pushing  the  thing  farther,  I  said  I  came  not  prepared  for  such  a  question ; 
I  have  given  my  reasons  against  it ;  you  may  do  as  you  have  a  mind.  You 
know  how  I  have  been  reproached  for,  as  they  say,  pretending  to  dictate  to 
my  Brethren.  That  they  might  then  not  have  that  handle  against  me,  I 
added  these  words,  which  in  these  circumstances  could  only  imply  a  physical 
power  in  them  to  do  the  thing,  but  no  concurrence  of  mine,  or  approbation 


HEN  11 Y  EDGAi:.  JJOO 

of  it  when  done  as  morally  good ;  and  I  appeal  to  yourself,  il'  in  conscience 
you  could  take  them  in  another  meaning.  Xo,  Sir,  I  never  can  approve  of 
such  a  measure.  My  opinion  is  that  what  cannot  lawfully  and  Cauonically 
ho  done,  ought  not  to  he  done.  But  that  this  cannot  he  Canonic-ally  done,  I 
have  already  shown  in  my  former  Protest,  to  which  I  still  adhere.  You 
know  what  a  pother  was  made  against  the  poor  Northern  Clergy  for  break 
ing  a  Canon,  I  dare  say  without  design,  and  how  they  arc  obliged  to  cry 
jH'crdi-i :  and  shall  we  presumptuously  and  deliberately  do  the  same?  This 
is  Halkerton's  Cow  with  a  witness — tell  it  not  in  Gath!  Perhaps  I  shall  be 
bullied  here  with  the  majority,  as  I  was  on  the  Eve  of  All  Saints,  where  I 
met  with  a  pretty  swatch  of  Cupar  justice.  But  you'll  pardon  me  to  say, 
that  a  majority  of  3  to  2,  or  any  whatever  number  even  to  one,  cannot  make 
wrong  right  or  right  wrong.  And  it  may  be  worth  considering  whether  a 
majority,  or  anything  less  than  the  enacting  power,  can  suspend  or  dispense 
with  Laws  made  by  the  whole ;  nor  can  I  sec  any  onerous  cause  for  our 
taking  such  a  latitude,  other  than  to  put  a  feather  into  E.'s  cap,  whose 
keenness  in  his  own  cause,  where  modesty  and  a  decent  reserve  would  have 
better  become  him,  showed  that  he  wanted  it,  and  betrayed  an  «ml>itii*  which 
was  no  recommendation.  It  was  highly  shocking  to  me ;  but  Charity 
thinketh  no  evil,  and  I  hope  he'll  make  amends  ;  but  we  would  do  well  to  be 
upon  our  guard.  If  he  wants  a  vote  in  our  Councils,  that  may  in  due  time 
be  granted  him,  without  incroaching  upon  our  Canons  ;  but  not  with  my 
consent  till  the  lloss  Clergy  be  settled,  which  the  Primus'  late  management 
makes  me  suspect  may  not  be  in  haste.  The  poor  man  is  vain,  and  under 
unlucky  influence.  The  Lord  pity  him,  and  us  with  him.  This  is  now  the 
second  time  he  has  made  use  of  my  name  to  impose  upon  and  circumvene 
my  worthy  Brother  G.  Some  time  ago,  after  repeated  complaints  (which  I 
have  in  rcti'iiti*)  of  you,  and  holding  forth  your  uniitness  to  manage  Edr,  he 
proposed  and  pressed  that  I  should  agree  to  get  lll  recommended  to  that 
station.  I  told  him  that  I  had  no  objection  to  11',  and,  as  1  was  independent 
of  Edr,  it  was  equal  to  me  who  was  there  ;  but  was  absolutely  against  a 
foreign  Nomination,  winch  he  pointed  at.  And  yet  in  his  next  Letter  to  G., 
to  procure  his  assent,  he  told  him  I  had  cordially  gone  into  it.  This  I 
challenged,  and,  as  I  still  think  I  had  reason,  called  insidious.  Upon  which 
he  returned  my  Letter,  and  I  sent  him  a  pacilick  one,  to  make  up  matters 
and  please  him ;  but  I  find  the  resentment  of  that  disappointment  still 
sticks,  tho  I  am  not  sure  that  the  design  is.  yet  dropt.  It  was  diverting  to 
hear  them  threatening  G.  with  their  censure  for  meddling  in  the  lioss 
Election,  and  me  at  the  same  time  for  not  meddling  in  that  of  Dumblane — 
like  the  Bailie  of  Leith,  who  fined  one  man  for  keeping  swine,  and  another 
for  not  keeping  them.  I  know  there  arc  but  too  many  in  the  world  who 
stick  at  no  means  to  compass  their  designs ;  but  it  strikes  me  with  grief  and 
horror  to  think  that  such  principles  and  practices  should  obtain  amongst  us. 
I  shall  only  add  two  words — "  Take  care,  you  arc  in  a  slippery  path,  and  if 
by  this  step  you  throw  a  majority  in  their  hands,  you  may  come  to  feel  the 
smart  of  it  as  soon  as  any  other,  when  they  have  served  their  ends  of  you, 
however  they  cajole  you  now."  I  pray  God  to  guide  us  all  well,  and  am,  &c., 

JOHN  ALEXANDER. 
November  26th,  1759. 


DIOCESE  OE  FIFE. 


Li  the  "British  Almanack  and  Glasgow  register  for  1801," 
p.  120,  appears,  for  the  first  time,  a  List  of  the 


Diocese  nf  J'ld'niliirijlt. 

Hi glit  Rev.  AVilliam  Abernethy  Drum- 
mond,  in  Edinburgh — Bishop. 

Edinburgh— Alex.  Allan,  John  AVeb- 
ster,  -James  AValkcr. 

Leith — Simon  Reid. 

Stirling — (leorgc  Gh'ig. 

(llasgov — Alex.  Jameson. 


Bishop. 


Muthil— Alex.  Cruickshank. 
Alloa — John  Rhind. 
St.  Andrews — AVilliam  Robb. 
Pittemveem — David  Low. 
Cupar — AVilliam  Xicoll. 

Dloci'xe  <;!'  ]> i/ it !,•!'/<!. 

Right  Rev.  Jonathiin  AVatson,  at  Lau 
rence  Kirk — Bishop. 
Forfar — John  Skinner. 
Kirriemuir — John  Buchan. 
Meitfe— Alex.  Xic-oll. 
Perth— Alex.  Walker. 
Strathtay — John  Robertson. 

]  >/(>i'i'se  ii f  Jlrcclili:. 

Right  Rev.  J.  Strachan,  in  Dundee — 
Bishop;  James  Bruce — Assistant. 

Arbroath,  

Brechin — James  Sommerville. 
Montrosc — David  Moir. 
Lochlee — Peter  Jolly. 
Drumlithic — Robert  Spark. 


Btoueliaven  —  CJeorgc  G  arden. 
Muchalls—  AVilliam  Millne. 

].)inf-;'.:c  of  Aberdeen. 
Right  Rev.  John  Skinner,  in  Aber 

deen  —  Bishop. 
Aberdeen  —  Roger  Ait  ken. 
Oldmcldrnm  —  Arthur  Walker. 
Ellon  —  John  Cruickshank. 
Cruden  —  John  Gloig. 
Peterhead—  Patrick  Torry. 
Longside  —  Jo.  Skinner  &  Jo.  Cuming. 
Lonmav  —  AVilliam  Sangstcr. 

*,  O 

Fyvie  —  Alex.  Christie. 
Tariff  —  John  Cruickshank. 
Cumincstown,  — 
Banff  —  James  Milne. 
Port  soy  —  John  C;mlno. 
Arradoul  —  Alex.  Sliand. 
Forguc  —  Andrev/  Ritchie. 
Meiklcfolla  —  James  Lines. 
Blairdaff,  - 


Right  Rev.  Alex    Jolly    at  Fraser- 

burgh  —  Bishop. 
Elgin  —  Hugh  Buchan. 
Keith  —  Alex.  Christie. 
Iluntley  —  James  Walker. 


Right   Rev.   Andrew  Macfarlane,   in 

Inverness — Bishop. 
Ord — AVilliam  Paterson. 
Appin — Donald  Maccoll. 

[Since  1801  the  List  has  increased  Fnnrtecn-f<>l,-1.] 

From  the  above  it  is  perceived  that  "Dunblane  and  Fife" 
are  yoked  together  under  " ,  Bishop;"  and  this  thread- 
less  tie  continued  till  1809,  when  the  change  was  made  to  the 
"  Diocese  of  Edinburgh  and  Fife,"  under 

LVIII.  DANIEL  SANDFORD,  D.D.  Oxon.     A.D.  1809-30. 

(Seal  given  under  Diocese  of  Edinburgh.) 

He  was  the  second  son  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Sandford,  of  Sand- 


DANIEL  SANDFOKD.  311 

ford  Hall,  in  the  County  of  Salop,  who  for  many  years  held 
Preferment  in  the  Church  of  Ireland,  but  .who  resigned  his 
Living  in  consequence  of  being  obliged  to  return  to  England. 

Daniel  was  Born  at  Delville,  near  Dublin,  in  1706.  His 
father  Died  in  early  life,  and  the  education  of  the  family  thus 
devolved  upon  their  mother,  who  was  left  a  very  young  widow, 
accomplished  and  elegant.  Sinking  under  her  affliction,  and 
unable  to  endure  the  scene  of  her  married  life,  she  almost  im 
mediately  on  her  husband's  death  abandoned  Sandford  Hall. 
The  old  Mansion,  which  had  been  for  generations  the  pride  of 
the  Family,  was  demolished,  much  valuable  timber  was  cut  down, 
and  the  Property  was  in  consequence  deteriorated.  Mrs.  Sand- 
ford  removed  with  her  family  to  Bath. 

The  name  of  Dowdier  is  immortal  in  the  annals  of  the  Epis 
copal  Church  of  Scotland,  for  beneficence.  For  GO  years  Daniel 
Sandford  found  a  friend  in  Mrs.  Harriet  Dowdier,  who  displayed 
towards  him  a  maternal  affection,  and  who  saw  him  enter,  before 
her,  into  his  rest. 

"\Ylien  quite  an  infant,  through  some  awkwardness  on  the 
part  of  his  nurse,  he  got  an  ugly  squint  or  obliquity  in  his  eyes. 
The  celebrated  Dr.  Darwin  endeavoured  to  repair  the  mischief, 
but  without  success.  He  Published,  in  a  Periodical,  an  Account 
of  his  experiments  on  this  occasion,  in  which  his  patient  is 
described  as  a  "  sweet  and  amiable  child." 

At  the  time  of  his  mother's  removal  to  Bath,  Daniel  was  only 
four  years  old,  and  was  sent  with  his  brothers  to  the  Grammar 
School,  where  he  received  his  elementary  instruction.  His 
mother,  however,  trusted  much  more  to  the  natural  parts  and 
assiduous  habits  of  her  sons,  than  to  the  assistance  of  masters. 
It  may  be  questioned  how  far  with  most  children  her  plan  of 
education  would  have  answered  ;  but  it  appears  that  she  used  to 
incarcerate  them  for  a  certain  number  of  hours  every  day,  and 
that  on  their  release  the  task  was  generally  found  to  have  been 
mastered.  On  the  same  principle  she  never  allowed  her  son 
Daniel  the  aid  of  a  Writing-master,  and  yet  it  is  well  known  how 
beautiful  was  his  penmanship.  He  used  to  say  himself,  and 
quote  Lord  Chesterfield  in  support  of  his  assertion,  that  any 


312  DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 

man  with  the  use  of  his  eves  and  fingers  might  write  what  hand 
he  pleased.  Mrs.  Sandford's  sons  were  indeed  occasionally  very 
differently  employed  dining  these  hours  of  imprisonment  from 
what  she  supposed,  for  they  were  none  of  them  deficient  in  those 
mischievous  propensities,  without  which  a  schoolboy  must  he 
either  Letter  or  worse  than  the  generality  of  his  species. 
Admitted,  when  still  a  hoy,  to  the  Drawing-Booms  of  the 
Duchess  of  Portland,  and  of  the  celebrated  Mrs.  Dclany,  and 
accustomed  to  the  conversation  of  the  most  intellectual  persons, 
he  saw  and  heard  every  thing  that  could  interest  and  instruct. 
He  loved  to  revert  to  this  in  after  years,  though  he  always  spoke 
of  it  with  a  sigh,  as  what  he  should  never  sec  again.  Mr.  Sand- 
ford  seems  to  have  Leen  always  of  a  delicate  habit ;  but  when 
about  11  years  old,  he  had  a  violent  Fever,  which  confined  him 
to  bed  for  several  weeks,  and  greatly  impaired  his  constitution. 
As  the  Fever  reached  its  crisis,  he  was  for  some  time  insensible, 
and  his  life  was  despaired  of.  The  first  sign  of  returning  con 
sciousness  was  displayed  by  his  shooting  a  marble  which  lay  on 
the  pillow  at  a  friend  who  had  watched  continually  by  his  bed 
side.  At  the  laugh  which  accompanied  this  exploit,  Mrs. 
Sandford  clasped  her  hands,  exclaimed  "Thank  God!"  and 
burst  into  tears.  "  You  may  be  thankful,"  said  the  lady,  "  but 
/  have  nearly  lost  my  eye." 

Soon  after  this,  it  appears  that  he  was  placed  at  Southamp 
ton,  together  with  the  Earl  of  Bristol,  under  the  charge  of  a 
Clergyman,  of  the  name  of  Watson,  afterwards  Preferred  to  the 
Rectory  of  Piothbury,  in  Northumberland.  Mr.  Watson  was  an 
accomplished  Scholar,  and  probably  did  justice  to  his  Pupil's 
education ;  but  he  was  a  man  of  coarse  mind,  and  it  was 
greatly  to  Mr.  Sandford's  satisfaction  that  he  was  removed  from 
his  charge,  and  entered  as  a  Commoner  at  Christ  Church  in 
1784,  under  the  superintendence  of  that  great  and  good  man, 
Dr.  Cyril  Jackson. 

He  encouraged  him  to  apply  to  him  on  all  occasions,  fre 
quently  directed  him  privately  in  his  studies,  and  treated  him  at 
all  times  with  the  most  flattering  confidence.  In  furtherance  of 
the  views  which  this  partiality  encouraged,  Mr.  Sandford  was,  at 


DANIEL  SANDFORD.  9i;->, 

the  request  of  the  Duchess  of  Portland,  appointed  by  Dr.  Moss, 
then  Bishop  of  Oxford,  to  a  Studentship  of  Christ  Church. 
Among  his  intimate  associates  were  the  Earl  of  Liverpool  and 
Lord  Bexley,  the  latter  of  whom  never  forgot  his  College  friend 
ship,  and  was  one  of  the  very  first  to  testify  to  his  widow,  after 
his  Death,  the  esteem  which  he  had  always  entertained  for  her 
deceased  husband. 

Mr.  Sandford  was  greatly  distinguished  while  at  Oxford  for 
accurate  and  accomplished  scholarship,  and  especially  for  the 
correctness  and  elegance  of  his  Latinity.  In  1787,  he  won  the 
Christ  Church  Prize  for  Latin  Composition ;  and  so  well  was  his 
style  known  in  College,  that,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  wrhen 
he  had  furnished  Exercises  for  his  friends,  his  assistance  was 
immediately  detected  by  the  Dean. 

He  used  to  mention  an  instance  which  occurred  while  en 
gaged  in  the  composition  of  his  successful  Essay.  Having  been 
much  occupied,  before  he  retired  to  rest,  with  some  refractory 
sentiment  which  he  was  unable  to  reduce  to  words,  he  dreamed 
that  a  Form  appeared  to  him,  and,  like  Order  in  the  Fairy-tale, 
adjusted  his  entangled  thoughts,  and  clothed  them  in  elegant 
Latinity.  On  awaking  he  availed  himself  of  the  suggestion,  and 
the  Passage  was  afterwards  pointed  out  to  him  by  the  Dean  as 
the  happiest  in  the  Essay.  It  does  not  appear  whether  he 
acknowledged  at  the  time  the  assistance  he  had  received.  He 
used  to  regret  that  Latin  Composition  was  less  insisted  on  now 
than  it  had  been  in  his  youth,  as  he  always  considered  this 
accomplishment  to  be  the  surest  test  of  Scholarship.  He  re 
tained  and  cultivated  his  talent  for  it  to  the  last ;  and  it  was  the 
ground  of  much  delightful  intercourse  in  Edinburgh  with  that 
accomplished  scholar  and  amiable  man,  Dr.  Gregory. 

At  the  Seat  of  the  Duchess  of  Portland,  where  he  spent  his 
Vacations,  when  not  at  Windsor  with  Mrs.  Delany,  he  imbibed  a 
taste  for  Botany,  which  supplied  him  with  an  innocent  and 
graceful  relaxation  in  later  life.  He  was  an  ardent  Disciple  of 
Linnaeus  in  this  interesting  branch  of  Natural  History ;  and  he 
discoursed  sweetly  and  instructively  on  such  themes.  He  used 
to  roam  the  fields  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Oxford  in  pursuit  of 

VOL.  II.  2  R 


814  DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 

his  favourite  Science,  and  dedicated  to  it  most  of  the  hours  which 
were  not  devoted  to  graver  Studies.  His  relaxations  were  not, 
however,  always  of  so  sylvan  a  character.  His  adroitness  in  the 
management  of  an  Indian  Canoe  upon  the  Elver  excited  the 
admiration  of  his  Compeers,  and  was  one  of  the  most  popular 
attractions  of  Christ  Church  Meadow.  This  was,  however,  a 
more  perilous  enjoyment  than  his  Botanical  pursuits,  for  he  was 
no  swimmer.  On  one  occasion  he  was  nearly  drowned  through 
the  spleen,  and  at  another  time  through  the  awkwardness,  of 
an  Associate. 

All  Mr.  Sandford's  recollections  of  College  life  were  pleasing, 
and  he  used  to  speak  of  the  six  years  of  his  residence  at  Oxford 
as  the  happiest  he  ever  spent.  He  was  a  thorough  Christ- 
Clmrch-Man,  and  he  never  discoursed  more  delightfully  than 
when  he  spoke  of  its  august  Walk  and  Classic  Meadow ;  of  its 
Wits  in  his  own  day,  the  elegant  Spencer,  and  the  Classic 
Canning  ;  of  its  awful  Censorship,  and  Venerable  Dean. 

Mrs.  Delany  has  been  already  mentioned  as  one  of  the 
persons  who  contributed  to  form  Mr.  Sandford's  character.  Her 
house  at  Windsor  was  always  open  to  him,  and  he  generally 
spent  a  great  part  of  his  Vacations  under  her  roof.  In  her 
Drawing-room  he  used  to  meet  most  of  the  distinguished  people 
of  the  day,  and  by  her  he  was  early  introduced  to  the  notice  of 
Royalty.  This  lady  was  honoured  by  George  III.  and  his  Con 
sort,  Queen  Caroline.  They  not  only  allowed  her  free  access  to 
themselves  at  all  times,  but  were  frequently  in  the  habit  of  visit 
ing  her  at  her  own  house  without  intimation.  On  several  of 
these  occasions,  Mr.  Sandford  was  with  Mrs.  Delany  when  she 
wTas  thus  distinguished,  and  his  own  merits  aided  the  recommen 
dation  of  his  friend  in  securing  the  favour  of  the  Queen.  Her 
Majesty  condescended  to  employ  him  while  at  Oxford  in  the 
Translation  of  a  favourite  Author  from  the  French,  and  her 
kindness  naturally  encouraged  hopes  of  future  professional  ad 
vancement.  That  these  hopes  were  not  subsequently  realized, 
was  not  owing,  it  will  appear,  to  any  want  of  kind  intention  on 
the  part  of  the  Queen. 

His  Studies  at  Oxford  were  interrupted  by  the  illness  of  his 


DANIEL  bAXDFOKD.  315 

mother  ;  and,  by  the  permission  of  the  Dean,  he  left  College  and 
confined  himself  entirely  to  her  sick  room.  His  devotedness  at 
this  time  greatly  injured  his  health,  and  almost  endangered  his 
life.  Never  leaving  his  mother's  side  while  he  felt  he  could  he 
of  any  service,  he  spent  the  whole  day  in  her  room,  in  which,  in 
the  height  of  summer,  she  had  a  fire  burning ;  and  it  was  not 
until  he  was  deprived  by  paralysis  of  the  use  of  one  of  his  arms, 
that  the  Physician  could  draw  him  from  her  apartment.  From 
the  stroke  of  paralysis  he  speedily  recovered,  but  the  illness 
which  accompanied  it  told  severely  on  his  constitution. 

No  one  was  ever  better  fitted  by  habits  and  pursuits  for 
Academic  life  than  he  was.  Possessing  neither  health  nor  dis 
position  for  more  public  scenes,  he  loved  the  seclusion  as  well  as 
the  leisure  of  the  Cloister,  and,  had  he  remained  at  Christ 
Church,  would  have  enjoyed  and  adorned  the  Office  for  which 
Dr.  Jackson  designed  him.  But  the  intentions  of  his  friend 
were  defeated,  and  his  future  prospects  determined  by  that 
common  occurrence  which  spoi]s  so  many  a  hopeful  Academician. 
In  1786,  he  had  become  acquainted  with  Miss  Douglas,  whose 
father,  after  fighting  on  the  side  of  the  Chevalier  through 
the  '45,  and  sharing  the  subsequent  fortunes  of  his  master,  had 
some  years  before  returned  from  France,  and  was  then  residing 
at  Bath. 

Mr.  Douglas  was  a  man  full  of  chivalrous  sentiment,  highly 
accomplished,  and  of  the  most  Courtly  address.  He  was  the  son 
of  Sir  William  Douglas,  Baronet,  of  Kelhead  in  Dumfriesshire, 
whose  representative  is  the  Marquis  of  Queensberry.  The 
manner  of  his  introduction  to  his  Ptoyal  master,  is  singularly 
illustrative  of  the  state  of  feeling  at  that  time  prevalent  in  Scot 
land,  and  will  account  for  his  subsequent  devotedness  to  Charles 
Stuart.  As  this  Prince  passed  Kelhead  on  his  march  into 
England,  Lady  Douglas  appeared  at  the  foot  of  the  avenue  with 
two  of  her  sons,  whom  she  presented  with  the  following  Spartan 
address  : — "  Please  your  Royal  Highness,  here  are  my  two  sons; 
if  they  don't  do  their  duty  in  a  manner  worthy  of  their  name, 
hang  them  on  the  first  tree." 

Erskine  Douglas  accompanied  his  master  in  his  disastrous 


316  DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 

Expedition,  and  in  his  subsequent  Retreat,  and  was  exposed  to 
many  perilous  adventures.  At  one  time  he  and  his  companions 
were  preserved  by  the  fidelity  of  a  former  Domestic  of  his 
mother's,  by  whom  they  were  apprized  of  the  treachery  of  their 
host,  who  had  sent  for  Troops  to  secure  them.  Their  retreat 
was  accomplished  over  the  Garden  wall,  which  afforded  Mr. 
Douglas  an  opportunity  of  exhibiting  his  gallantry  in  aid  of  an 
unfortunate  friend,  afterwards  taken  and  beheaded.  This  gentle 
man  was  of  a  corpulent  habit,  and  being  unable  to  climb  the 
wall,  must  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  his  pursuers,  had  not 
his  more  agile  associate  assisted  him  over  on  his  shoulders  just 
as  the  King's  party  entered  the  Garden.  One  of  the  fugitives, 
who  was  rash  enough  to  return  for  his  purse,  was  taken.  For 
some  time  Mr.  Douglas  wandered  about  in  disguise  as  a  female 
mendicant,  and  in  that  character  made  his  appearance  at 
Queensbcrry  House,  in  Edinburgh,  and  with  great  difficulty 
gained  admittance  to  his  mother,  Lady  Douglas,  who  supplied 
him  with  a  more  suitable  attire.  Under  a  feigned  name  he 
found  an  asylum  in  the  houses  of  different  friends,  and  was 
sometimes  present  when  his  own  perils  were  the  subject  of  con 
versation.  On  one  occasion,  when  some  one  was  deploring  the 
fate  of  poor  Erskine  Douglas,  and  expressing  a  fear  lest  he  had 
been  taken,  a  young  lady  in  the  company  betrayed  her  interest 
by  fainting.  However  he  might  have  been  flattered  \}j  such  a 
disclosure  on  her  part,  he  had  sufficient  self-command  to  keep 
his  own  secret.  After  the  Battle  of  Cullodeu,  in  which  he  en 
countered  one  of  his  brothers  on  the  opposite  side,  he  made  his 
escape  to  the  Continent,  where  he  remained  with  Prince  Charles 
Edward  for  several  years.  He  never  spoke  of  the  Prince  but 
with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  as  "  his  dear  master." 

Mr.  Sandford's  Marriage,  at  the  age  of  24,  with  this  gentle 
man's  eldest  daughter,  Frances  Catherine  Douglas,  in  1790,  was 
considered  by  his  friends  to  be  justified  by  his  expectations  from 
Windsor.  He  had  been  previously  admitted  to  Deacon's  Orders 
in  Christ  Church  Cathedral  by  the  Bishop  of  Chester,  and 
immediately  on  his  Marriage  he  removed  to  Sunbury,  from  which 
he  served  the  adjoining  Curacy  of  Han  worth. 


DANIEL  SAXDFORD.  317 

In  the  following  year  he  was  Ordained  Priest  by  the  amiable 
and  exemplary  Porteous,  then  Bishop  of  London.  On  this 
occasion,  he  strikingly  exhibited  the  deep  sense  which  he  enter 
tained  of  the  responsibility  of  the  Priestly  Office.  Overcome  by 
his  feelings  during  the  Celebration  of  the  Service,  he  fainted  at 
the  Altar,  and  it  was  necessary  to  remove  him  from  the  Church. 
Bishop  Porteous  conveyed  him  home  in  his  carriage,  and  ever 
afterwards  distinguished  him  by  his  friendship.  During  his  stay 
at  Hanworth,  he  was  frequently  invited  to  Fulham,  and  had 
opportunities  of  cultivating  an  acquaintance  which  had  been  so 
singularly  commenced. 

That  he  would  be  disposed  to  make,  f nil  proof  of  his  Ministry, 
might  be  inferred  from  his  previous  character.  He  had,  on  one 
occasion,  rather  a  singular  opportunity  of  doing  so.  Driving 
home  late  at  night,  he  was  stopped  by  a  Highwayman,  who,  in 
no  very  equivocal  manner,  intimated  his  wishes  by  presenting  a 
pistol  to  his  breast.  To  his  purse  he  appended  an  admonition, 
which  excited  the  ruffian's  surprise,  though  it  elicited  no  very 
courteous  acknowledgment.  "So,  then,  3*011  arc  a  Parson," 
quoth  he,  "  and  you  are  a  Simpleton  too,  for  if  you  had  lighted 
your  lamps,  no  man  would  have  dared  to  stop  you."  Mr.  Sand- 
ford  inquired  how  he  should  dispose  of  any  of  the  same  honour 
able  Fraternity  whom  he  might  encounter  on  the  road.  "  Oh, 
say  that  you  gave  all  your  money  to  the  Gentleman  on  the  grey 
horse." 

At  the  close  of  the  year  1790,  Mr.  Sandford  lost  his  brother 
John.  His  boyish  passion  for  the  Sea  was  quite  enthusiastic, 
and  did  not,  as  is  sometimes  the  case,  w^ear  off  with  the  gloss  of 
his  Uniform.  It  overcame  the  objections  of  his  mother,  who 
long  resisted  his  importunity,  and  was  only  induced  to  yield 
when  she  saw  his  desire  was  insurmountable.  "  Daniel,"  said 
this  determined  Tar,  "  I  never  hide  anything  from  you,  for  I  know 
you  are  to  be  trusted.  Do  you  see  that  wall  ?  Over  that  wall 
I  go  this  night,  and  off  to  Bristol,  and  I  will  get  on  board  one 
of  the  Ships  and  away  to  Sea,  for  I  can  live  no  longer  on  Land. 
Now,  don't  you  go  and  tell  my  mother." 

John  Sandford  was  present  at  the  memorable  Siege  of  Gib- 


318  DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 

raltar.  He  had  good  hopes  of  rising  in  his  profession  through 
the  interest  of  his  connexion,  the  Earl  of  St.  Vincent,  and  his 
kind  friend  Admiral  Kempenfelt.  The  latter  Officer's  partiality 
to  him  was  so  great  that  he  was  encouraged  by  it  one  day 
respectfully  to  remonstrate  with  him  on  his  profane  habit  of 
swearing.  The  Admiral  thanked  him  for  his  advice,  and  assured 
him  with  an  oath  that  he  would  not  so  offend  again. 

Admiral  Kempenfelt  perished  in  the  ".Royal  George"  when 
that  vessel  was  sunk,  by  an  extraordinary  accident,  in  harbour. 
It  was  a  lovely  day  :  the  water  was  studded  with  pleasure  boats, 
and  the  decks  of  the  Admiral's  ship  were  covered  with  the  crew, 
and  with  the  women  who  were  washing  their  clothes.  John 
Sandford  was  standing  in  a  vessel  near,  and  turned  to  a  friend  to 
remark,  "If  the  'Royal  George'  takes  another  such  lurch,  she 
will  go  down."  He  looked  back  again,  and  there  was  nothing  to 
be  seen  but  a  huge  black  keel,  and  a  raging  swell  of  waters. 

"  With  the  whole  of  his  Patrimony,  which  amounted  to  some 
thousand  pounds,  and  which  was  punctually  paid,  Mr.  Sandford 
parted  on  the  very  day  he  received  it,  and,  except  in  a  solitary 
instance,  the  friends  who  were  indebted  to  him  never  made  even 
an  offer  of  repayment."  This  is  a  strong  and,  doubtless,  veri 
table  assertion  in  the  "  Remains"  of  his  dutiful  son  John,  which 
ought  to  counterpoise  another,  by  others  who  have  told  me  that 
Bishop  Sandford  learned  to  be  "  Scotch  aiiini/,"  and  was  some 
what  "  needy  and  greedy"  in  the  way  of  "  Surplice  Fees."  This 
is  my  way  of  "  doing  business,"  to  let  it  be  known  that  Bishops 
are  sinners  as  well  as  xaints — i.e.,  that  the  lent  of  men  are  but 
•men  at  the  best.  If  candour  would  come  out,  every  mortal  is 
constitutionally  a  little  fond  of  "  filthy  lucre."  "  It's  a  dirty  bird 
that  fouls  its  own  nest." 

Under  these  circumstances,  as  a  residence  at  Sunbury  proved 
very  expensive,  and  he  had  no  immediate  prospect  of  Preferment, 
he  was  induced  to  entertain  the  suggestion  of  Mrs.  Sandford's 
relations  in  Scotland,  who  recommended  a  temporary  residence 
in  Edinburgh.  They  represented  the  advantage  which  might 
accrue  to  an  English  Clergyman  of  popular  talents,  who  should 
open  a  Chapel  in  that  City,  and  receive  Pupils  into  his  house. 


DANIEL  SANDFORD.  319 

So  he  quitted  his  Curacy  at  Sunbury,  and  took  up  his  residence 
in  Edinburgh  in  1792. 

His  Congregation  at  first  was  chiefly  composed  of  English 
families  residing  in  Edinburgh.  The  Place  of  Meeting  was  in  a 
small  Hall  in  West  Register  Street,  which  was  afterwards  occu 
pied  as  John  Moir's  Printing  Office.  This  was  the  first  Episco 
pal  Congregation  in  the  New  Town ;  afterwards  S.  George's, 
York  Place.  The  want  of  increased  accommodation  soon  became 
apparent,  and  a  proposal  was  made  by  the  Clergy  of  another 
"Episcopal  Chapel"  to  associate  him  in  their  Cure.  But  he 
declined  this  offer,  and,  by  the  exertions  of  some  of  his  hearers, 
a  Subscription  was  raised  in  a  few  days,  for  the  erection  of  a 
"suitable"  Place  of  Worship.  This  was  opened  for  Divine 
Service  in  1797,  under  the  name  of  "Charlotte  Chapel,"  in 
Rose  Street,  near  Charlotte  Square,  and  in  it  Mr.  Sandford 
remained  until  his  removal  to  S.  John's  in  1818.  '  His  grandson, 
Daniel  Fox  Sandford,  now  holds  the  first  Curacy  there,  and  is 
praiseworthy  for  his  Pulpit  eloquence  and  works  of  mercy  towards 
the  outcast  and  the  strayed. 

It  has  often  been  observed  that  there  is  much  of  poetry  in 
every  day  life,  and  that  there  are,  perhaps,  few  individuals  whose 
history,  if  truly  narrated,  would  not  exhibit  incidents  as  marvel 
lous  as  the  most  interesting  fictions  of  romance. 

Few  men  enter  life  with  better  professional  prospects  than 
Mr.  Sandford  did,  and  few  men,  in  passing  through  it,  have 
enjoyed  likelier  opportunities  of  fortune.  In  early  life,  he  had 
been  urged  by  a  family  friend,  with  fortune,  and  without  children, 
to  make  choice  of  a  secular  profession.  And  his  pious  preference 
of  the  Church  in  this  instance,  as  it  afterwards  appeared,  lost 
him  a  bequest  of  £70,000. 

Perhaps  the  Incident  about  to  be  narrated  is  one  of  the  most 
striking  instances  of  the  methods  by  which  God  weaned  him 
from  the  world.  One  morning  in  September,  1801,  a  packet 
reached  him  from  Bath,  which,  on  being  opened,  was  found  to 
contain  a  caricature  and  some  other  squibs,  and  was  accordingly 
returned  to  the  Post  Office.  On  the  succeeding  day  arrived  a 
Letter  bearing  the  same  Post-mark,  and  purporting  to  come 


820  DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 

from  a  lady  whose  name  was  unknown  to  any  of  the  family,  with 
information  that  a  Solicitor  had  been  inquiring  after  the  family 
of  Sandford,  and  in  particular  for  himself,  at  the  request  of  an 
old  Gentleman  of  the  same  name,  possessed  of  riches,  who  wished 
to  present  him  with  a  valuable  Living,  and  from  whom  he  might 
cherish  further  expectations. 

Livings  seldom  go  a-begging,  and  heirs  are  not  often  to  be 
sought  for  when  rich  old  men  are  in  question ;  and  the  present 
Letter  was,  therefore,  naturally  considered  as  a  repetition  of  the 
witticism  of  the  preceding  day,  and  destined  to  the  same  fate. 
A  friend,  however  (the  liev.  Sydney  Smith),  to  whom  the  cir 
cumstance  was  mentioned,  knew,  by  name,  the  old  Gentleman 
alluded  to,  and  by  his  advice  an  answer  was  returned,  intimating 
that  Mr.  Sandford  was  the  person  for  whom  inquiry  was  made. 
In  reply  the  name  and  address  of  the  Solicitor  were  given,  with 
an  episode  on  the  "immense  riches"  of  the  old  heirless  Gentle 
man.  He  was  very  wealthy,  very  old,  very  ill,  and  very  anxious 
for  an  heir.  This  was  followed  by  a  Letter  from  the  Solicitor, 
dictated  by  his  employer,  confirmatory  and  interrogatory,  espe 
cially  as  to  the  number  and  names  of  Mr.  Sandford's  children. 
A  second,  written  in  the  same  way,  enclosed  a  draft  for  £'100,  as 
a  testimony  of  regard,  and  a  proof  that  the  inquiry  was  not 
suggested  by  idle  curiosity. 

Most  men  would  have  been  somewhat  anxious  to  come  into 
closer  contact  with  this  man  of  gold,  and  to  have  known  the 
nature  and  extent  of  his  intentions,  but  Mr.  Sandford  was  satis 
fied  to  intrust  his  cause  to  the  disinterestedness  of  an  Attorney 
whom  he  had  never  seen,  and  to  the  kindly  feelings  of  an  old 

«/ 

Humourist  who  had  never  seen  him.  He  sent  the  old  man  a 
Volume  of  Sermons  which  he  had  lately  Published,  and  Dedi 
cated  by  permission  to  the  Queen,  and  then  felt  that  he  had  done 
all  that  a  gentleman  could  do  to  secure  the  smiles  of  Fortune. 

It  would  not,  perhaps,  have  been  surprising  if  nothing  further 
had  been  heard  of  the  Patron  or  of  his  Attorney;  but,  at  the  end 
of  six  months  it  was  communicated  that  the  former  was  "in  a 
deplorable  state  of  health,  and  without  hope  of  alleviation,"  and 
an  earnest  wish  was  expressed  that  Mr.  Sandford  could  make  it 


DANIEL  SANDFORD.  821 

convenient  to  see  him,  as  a  visit  might  be  attended  with  the 
greatest  advantage.  Mr.  Sandford  was  at  this  time  engaged  in 
watching  by  the  sick  bed  of  a  dear  friend,  and,  at  first,  he  deter 
mined  not  to  leave  home.  But  the  entreaty  of  his  friend  prevailed 
on  him  to  take  the  journey,  at  the  close  of  which  he  was  intro 
duced  to  his  opulent  Namesake.  He  is  described  in  a  Letter 
from  Mr.  Sandford  to  his  wife,  as  a  "handsome,  good-humoured 
man  of  82,  and,  when  out  of  pain,  which  was  seldom  the  case, 
very  lively."  The  old  Gentleman  expressed  himself  as  pleased 
with  him,  and  delighted  with  his  Sermons ;  and  the  Agent,  who 
wras  directed  to  conduct  him  over  the  Estate,  and  to  point  out 
the  Living  attached  to  it,  assured  him  of  the  extent  and  certainty 
of  his  prospects. 

It  is  amusing,  but  at  the  same  time  delightful,  to  observe  the 
composure  with  which  Mr.  Sandford  writes  to  the  Confidante  of 
his  most  secret  thoughts  upon  a  subject  which  would  have 
agitated  most  men.  The  only  allusion  which  he  makes  to  his 
prospects  is  this  : — "  Unless  something  very  untoward  happens, 

I  shall  be  a shire  Laird.     From  what  L tell;-;  me,  I 

am  sure  of  this  fine  Property,  in  the  most  lovely  County  you  ever 
saw." 

From  his  Namesake's  house  he  repaired  to  Oxford,  and  took 
his  Doctor's  Degree ;  saw  for  the  last  time  his  venerable  friend, 
the  Dean  of  Christ  Church;  and  tbcn  hurried  back  io  bis 
Pastoral  Charge  in  Edinburgh.  He  had  made  an  effort,  but  was 
too  delicate  to  follow  up  his  prospects  with  the  urgency  which 
would  have  marked  a  worldly  mind.-  The  old  man  grew  worse, 
made  his  Will,  Died,  and,  instead  of  his  splendid  Fortune,  a 
Legacy  of  .-£700  was  the  reward  of  Mr.  Sandford's  delicacy  ! 

Dr.  Sandford  had  now  been  for  some  years  officiating  in 
Edinburgh  as  a  "Presbyter  of  the  English  Church,"  and  his 
character  was  generally  known  and  respected.  But  his  situation 
had  been  hitherto  anomalous,  and  one  in  which  a  conscientious 
and  scrupulous  mind  could  not  be  entirely  at  ease.  He  had  been 
officiating  as  an  Episcopal  Clergyman  without  the  recognition  of 
Episcopal  authority !  But  on  the  19th  November,  1804,  Dr. 
Sandford  and  his  little  Flock  came  into  Communion  with  the 

VOL.   II.  2  S 


322  DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 

(Episcopal)  Church  of  Scotland,  and  owned  a  legitimate  Epis 
copacy.  \Scc  "AniHtls  of  ScotcJi  Episcopacy,"  and  "  licmaius  of 
Bishop  Siiiitlford."] 

The  See  of  Edinburgh  had  been  vacated  by  the  retirement  of 
Bishop  William  Abcrnethy  Drummond,  and  important  interests 
were  involved  in  the  appointment  of  his  Successor.  It  is  to  the 
honour  of  the  Clergy  of  Scottish  Ordination,  that  they  should 
have  unanimously  recommended  a  stranger  to  the  vacant  Office. 
To  Dr.  Sandford,  "  Episcopalians"  were  mainly  indebted  for  the 
union  which  lie  brought  about ;  and  his  manners,  character, 
and  connexions,  eminently  qualified  him  for  the  Episcopate  of 
Edinburgh. 

His  Consecration  took  place  at  Dundee  on  February  9,  180G. 
The  Primus,  Bishop  Skinner  of  Aberdeen,  Bishop  Jolly  of  Moray, 
and  Bishop  Watson  of  Dunkcld,  were  the  officiating  Prelates. 
Mr.  Walker,  the  friend  of  Dr.  Sandford,  and  his  Successor  in 
the  Diocese  of  Edinburgh,  Preached  on  this  occasion ;  and  his 
Sermon,  from  Titus  iv.  lo,  which  excited  considerable  interest, 
has  been  given  to  the  world. 

For  20  years,  Bishop  Sandford  had  officiated  in  the  Chapel 
erected  for  him  soon  after  he  settled  in  Edinburgh.  In  1818  he 
had  the  happiness  of  Consecrating  for  his  Congregation  S.  John's 
Chapel,  which  is  an  elegant  specimen  of  Florid  Gothic,  and 
forms  one  of  the  most  striking  features  of  Edinburgh.  It  was 
built  by  voluntary  contribution,  and  will  long  attest  the  munifi 
cent  spirit  which  erected  it,  and  serve  as  a  lasting  Monument  to 
him  who  first  officiated  within  its  walls. 

He  united  in  Marriage  his  eldest  surviving  daughter  in  1816 
to  the  Rev.  Charles  Lane,  and  his  two  younger  daughters  were 
afterwards  Married — the  elder  to  Montague  Baker  Bere,  Esq.  of 
Moorbath  House,  Devon,  and  the  younger  to  James  Edmund 
Leslie,  Esq.,  junior  of  Leslie  Hill,  in  the  County  of  Antrim.  In 
these  Marriages  there  was  all  that  he  could  have  desired  for  his 
children. 

His  eldest  son,  Erskine  Douglas,  Born  1793,  was  Sheriff  of 
Gallowa}r. 

His  second  son,  Sir  Daniel  Keyt  Sandford,  was  Knighted  by 


DANIEL  SANDFOED.  323 

King  William  IV. ;  ably  filled  the  Chair  of  Greek  for  several 
years  in  Glasgow  University ;  and  Died  of  Typhus  Fever,  in  one 
week's  illness,  on  the  4th  February,  1838. 

His  youngest  son,  John,  Born  1801,  was  Presented,  in  1827, 
to  the  Vicarage  of  Chillingham  by  the  Bishop  of  Durham,  and  is 
now  Archdeacon  of  Coventry.  He  compiled  the  Two  Volumes 
of  the  "Remains"  of  his  father  (rather  of  the  Puritanic  smack), 
from  which  we  have  gathered  the  above. 

On  August  20,  1819,  Bishop  Sandford  wrote  from  Fulliam 
(where  he  was  on  a  visit  to  the  Bishop  of  London)  to  the  Rev. 
David  Low,  Pittenweem,  that  he  had  expressed  to  the  Primus  a 
desire  to  resign  the  "Diocese  of  Fife"  into  the  hands  of  the 
College  of  Bishops,  on  account  of  his  oppressive  complaint  of 
Strangury  incapacitating  him  for  travelling,  in  expectation 
that  the  few  Clergy  in  the  Kingdom  of  Fife  would  Elect  him, 
knowing  his  knack  of  "laying  up  in  store,"  as  also  his  great 
"mother  wit"  and  shrewd  common  sense.  This  idea,  however, 
ended  only  in  thowjlit,  as  Mr.  Low  succeeded  that  same  year  as 
Successor  to  Bishop  Andrew  Macfarlane  of  Ross  and  Argyle. 

Allusions  have  been  made  to  Bishop  Sandford's  delicate  state 
of  health.  The  illness,  under  which  he  laboured  for  many  years, 
and  which  eventually  terminated  his  life,  originated  in  one  of 
those  slight  indiscretions  which  are  so  often  the  foundation  of 
serious  complaints.  It  was  in  1705  that  he  caught  cold  through 
exposure  to  the  rain  in  thin  shoes,  and  the  complaint  thus 
induced  bade  defiance  to  medical  skill,  and  caused  him  almost 
continual  suffering  for  35  years.  In  1830  it  appeared  to  have 
reached  its  crisis,  and  for  some  weeks  his  life  was  despaired  of. 
Prayers  were  offered  up  for  him  in  Church ;  and  several  of  his 
family,  who  were  in  the  South,  were  sent  for  to  receive  his 
Blessing.  His  sufferings  in  body  were  acute,  but  on  such  occa 
sions  his  character  always  shone  forth  with  peculiar  lustre.  A 
few  years  before,  he  had  undergone  a  most  excruciating  operation 
without  a  murmur;  in  the  present  instance,  though  his  sufferings 
frequently  amounted  to  agony,  his  affiance  and  composure  were 
not  for  a  moment  disturbed.  He  was  ready  to  depart ;  he  could 
trust  God  with  his  family,  and  he  gently  expostulated  with  his 


:)2i  DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 

weeping  family,  and  bade  them  not  desire  that  he  should  live. 
It  appeared  likely  that  life  would  be  at  best  but  a  prolongation 
of  suii'oring,  and  his  other  prospect  was  that  of  a  Laud  in  which 
there  is  no  more  pain. 

lie  lived  to  see  all  his  children  happy  and  prospering  around 
him — even  his  youngest  child  had  been  blessed  with  his  affection 
for  20  years;  and  at  length  fell  asleep,  at  11  P.M.,  on  the  14th 
January,  1880,  in  the  C  1th  year  of  his  age,  when  he  had  served 
God  for  nearly  half  a  Century.  He  is  Buried  at  the  East  end  of 
S.  John's,  Edinburgh,  and  the  Congregation  erected  a  Tablet  to 
his  memory  within  the  Church,  on  the  Gospel  side  of  the  Altar. 

LIX.  JAMES  WALKER,  D.D.  Oxon.     A.D.  1830-38. 

The  Title  of  the  See  was  again  changed  to  "  United  Diocese 
of  Edinburgh,  Fife,  and  Glasgow,"  and  continued  so  till  1838. 
The  subject  of  Memoir  was  Born  at  Fraserburgh,  Aberdeenshire, 
on  the  21th  January,  1770.  Educated  first  at  his  Parish  School, 
and  then  at  Marischal  College,  Aberdeen,  he  entered  S.  John's 
College,  Cambridge,  where  he  took  B.A.  in  1703,  M.A.  in  1706, 
and  D.D.  in  182G.  His  mother's  name  was  Jane  Ramsay,  sister 
to  the  Rev.  James  Ramsay,  who  went  to  the  West  Indies  as 
Chaplain  to  Sir  Charles  Middleton,  afterwards  Lord  Barham. 
He  became  Vicar  of  Teston  and  Nettlestead,  in  Kent.  He  was 
very  influential  in  the  suppression  of  the  Slave  Trade,  and  was 
a  friend  of  Wilberforce. 

On  Sunday  the  25th  June,  1820,  at  his  D.D.  graduation, 
he  Preached  at  Great  S.  Mary's  Church,  Cambridge,  "On  the 
Original,  Successive,  and  Permanent  Evidence  of  Revealed 
Religion."  This  Sermon  was  Published,  along  with  others,  in 
a  Volume,  at  the  request  of  S.  Peter's  Congregation,  Edinburgh, 
in  1820.  Like  all  Homilies  of  the  time,  these  are  constipate 
enough.  The  marvel  is  how  they  could  be  delivered  at  all. 

He  was  Ordained  Deacon  in  1703,  and  Priest  in  1805,  by  the 
Bishop  of  Kildare.  After  he  took  his  B.A.  Degree,  he  returned 
to  Scotland,  when  he  became  Sub-Editor  of  "  The  Encyclopedia 
Britannica,"  the  third  Edition  of  which  was  then  passing  through 


JAMES  WALKEE.  325 

the  Press  under  the  able  surveillance  of  Dr.  George  Gleig, 
afterwards  Bishop  of  Brechin.  In  the  frequent  absence  of  the 
latter,  the  former  took  a  great  interest  in  the  "  Encyclopedia," 
and  wrote  several  scholarly  Articles  in  it.  About  this  period,  he 
also  Published,  from  time  to  time,  Pamphlets  on  controverted 
points,  but  without  his  name.  Between  1793  and  1805,  he  was 
abroad  with  Sir  John  Hope,  Bart,  of  Craighall,  as  his  Tutor. 
While  on  the  Continent  he  came  in  contact  with  the  most  eminent 
Philosophers  in  Germany,  whose  views  on  certain  Metaphysical 
topics  were  then  making  great  stir,  and  which  he  made  himself 
thoroughly  master  of.  The  Article  on  Kant's  System,  inserted 
in  the  "  Supplement  to  the  Encyclopedia,"  was  written  while  he 
was  resident  at  Weimar.  He  had  an  interview  with  Napoleon 
when  First  Consul  of  France. 

As  his  heart  was  all  along  on  the  Profession  which  he  had 
been  educating  himself  for,  when  he  returned  home  and  received 
Priest's  Orders,  he  settled  in  Edinburgh,  and  became  "  Minister 
of  S.  Peter's  Chapel,  Roxburgh  Place,"  a  Charge  which  he  held 
till  1829,  when  feeble  health  necessitated  him  to  resign  wholly 
to  his  junior  Colleague,  the  Piev.  Charles  Hughes  Terrot,  A.M., 
the  present  Bishop  of  Edinburgh.  In  1811,  "  James  Walker, 
Dean  of  Edinburgh,"  was  chosen  Prolocutor  for  the  Lower 
Chamber  of  the  Synod  of  Aberdeen,  at  the  General  S}<nod  which 
sat  there  for  two  days  (the  19th  and  20th  of  June),  whereat  a 
Code  of  Twenty-six  Canons  was  drawn  up  and  enacted.  The 
only  Code  of  Canons  which  the  Church  in  Scotland  possessed 
hitherto  was  that  which  was  known  as  "Bishop  Rattray's 
Canons,"  being  mainly  got  up  by  him.  They  were  Sixteen  in 
number,  and  were  adopted  only  at  a  Meeting  of  Bishops  in 
Edinburgh  in  1743,  but  were  not  received  at  a  General  Synod  of 
Bishops  and  Priests.  However,  folks  were  not  then  so  particular 
and  touchy  about  doubtful  Rubrics  and  Canons  as  now-a-days. 
At  this  Synod,  the  "  Scotch  Communion  Office"  was  declared, 
by  the  Sixteenth  Canon,  to  be  of  "Primary  authority"-—  titles 
and  terms  which  subsequently  entailed  bitter  party  spirit.  Query. 
— As  there  were  multifarious  versions  of  the  "  Scotch  Communion 
Office"  used  throughout  the  different  Districts,  what  and  whose 


320 


DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 


version,  with  Date  thereupon,  was  Thumbed,  Tabled,  and  Cano 
nized  in  Bishop  Skinner's  House,  Long-acre,  A.D.  1811?* 

Mr.  Walker  visited  the  City  of  Rome  on  November  11,  1817, 
and  remained  till  after  Easter  1818,  where,  in  an  "  upper  room," 
he  conducted  Divine  Service  for  the  edification  of  resident  British 


SCOTCH  COMMUNION  OIIICKS. 


I0:i7.  Kin 
171-.' 
17  is 


172 


17-')5. 
17  l.'i. 


1750. 


Charles  J.' 
Earl  of  Winton's 
Nonjurors 


:^:2.  Bishop  iliekcs'. 


Pen  and  ink. 

Pen  and  ink. 


Bishop  Gadderars.  At  this  lime, 
si  iine,  as  Jiishop  1'alcoiiar.  used 
that  of  H;:>7  ;  some,  as  Bishop 
Rose.  u>ed  the.  English  Oilice, 
with  the  addition  of  the  Scotch 
Prayer  of  Oblation  ;  sonic,  as  Bp. 
Ouchterlony,  used  the  English 
Oilice,  with  Transposition,  as  Bp. 
Overall. 

Bishop  Gadderar  now  wrote  Dircc- 
tiuns,  &C.,  on  the  Margin  of  that 
of  17'M,  from  which  an  Edition 
was  circulated  las  Bishop  Gerard 
writes)  "by  two  merchants,  hop 
ing  to  make  a  penny.'' 

Bishop  Gerard's. 

Maybe  said  to  be  the  first  Standard 
Edition.  "  Recommended  "  by  the 
Canons  of  this  year. 

Dated  with  a  1'en  on  the  first  page  : 
no  Title  Page.  Prepared  by  Bp. 
Rattray.  In  the  British  Museum. 

Very  small  size,  without  place  or 
name. 


170i.  Bishop  William  Falconar's.  "That 
they  may  become"  introduced  for 
the  first  time. 

MS.  Variations  by  Bp  Alexander  of  Alloa. 

1705.  Bishop  Robert  Forbes'. 

1707.  Printed  by  Robertson,  Edinburgh. 

1771.  ,,  Chalmers,  Aberdeen. 

1774.  Robertson,  Edinburgh. 


17  so.  Printed  by  Chalmers,  Aberdeen. 

17*1.  Printed  at  Edinburgh. 

17!>\i.  ,,  London:  Ho.  Collated 

by  I  iishop  ]  lorsley.  Reprinted  in 
Skinner's  Oilice  illustrated. 

17 '.)(>.  Bp.  Abernethy  Drummond's  :  l'2mo. 
Variations  considerable.  With 
Private  Devotions. 

1*00.  Printed  by  Clialmers  for  Ironside  of 
Aberdeen :  *vo. 

1*01.  Edinburgli:   Ivlmo. 

1*05.  "Forfar  John's,"  under  the  eye  of 
his  father,  Bishop  John  Skinner. 

1*00.  Edinburgh. 

1*07.  Aberdeen:  *vo. 

ISO!). 

Aberdeen  Reprints — vi/.,  isn,  lsl-2,  Ixis, 
1S1!),  1S.-J5.  ls:{f),  ls.iM.  isj.i,  1847. 

ls:>(l.  Printed  by  Brander,  Elgin:  limo. 

INI->.  University  1'ress,  ].\dinr.  Agrees 
with  those  of  1704  and  1705. 

Is  It.  Printed  by  Xcill,  Edinr.  Agrees 
with  Skinner's,  IsOO. 

Is  1.1.  Printed  by  Xeiil.  Agrees  witli  no 
other  Edition.  Said  to  have  been 
got  up  for  S.  Columba's,  Edin 
burgli.  It  nearly  found  its  way 
into  the  Church  at  Jedburgh. 
Suppressed.  Demy  lOmo. 

184i.  Burns,  London:  -Ito.  Black  Letter, 
Red  Rubrics,  and  Musical  Nota 
tion. 

1*1.7.  Lendrum's,  Edinburgh. 

is  17.  Aberdeen  :  1-Jmo.  With  "  Com 
panion  to  the  Altar/' 

is  19.  Bp.  Torry's.      R.  Lendrum,  Edinr. 

!H(iO.  Rev.  G.  H.  Forbes',  Bnrntisland. 

1807.  Rev.  J.  B.  Pratt's,  LL.D.,  Cruden. 


A.D.  17H-2.  Bishop  Abernethy  Drummond  writes: — "Every  single  Bishop  has 
made  Editions,  and  even  some  changes  and  additions,  according  to  their  liking." 

A.D.  1810.  Bishop  Gleig  complains,  in  a  Letter  to  Bishop  Skinner,  of  "the  use 
less  alterations  which  were  made  by  many  of  the  Clergy  in  the  Daily  Service 

Every  man  in  my  Diocese  varied  the  Form  according  to  his  own  judgment  or  caprice  ; 
and  to  such  length  was  this  most  unaccountable  rage  for  Innovation  carried,  that  the 
very  Communion  Office  was  interpolated  with  long  prayers." 

Surely,  after  such  a  fluctuant  Catalogue,  Stereotype  Faith  has  cogent  claims. 


JAMES  WALKER,  327 

subjects,  "  without  Vestments  and  Music — Pope  Pius  VII.  and 
his  Ministers  not  only  the  whole  time  looking  on  and  winldng  at 
our  Proceedings,  but  being  even  gratified  by  the  decorous  and 
unostentatious  manner  in  which  we  studied  to  conduct  them." 
It  is  strange  that  in  none  of  his  Letters  from  Rome,  either  Pub 
lished  in  Stephen's  Episcopal  Magazine  or  in  MS.,  is  there 
mention  made  of  the  exact  Room  or  Hall.  It  was  while  here  he 
met  with  the  notorious  Chevalier  Bunse,  Tutor  to  the  Crown- 
Prince  of  Prussia.  Bunse  Married  a  "  lady  of  quality,"  and  Dr. 
Walker  Baptized  their  first  child. 

He  was  Married  to  Madeline  Erskine,  on  the  20th  February, 
1821,  and  had  a  family  of  estimable  daughters. 

On  Wednesday,  June  22,  ]825,  he  Preached  a  Visitation 
Sermon  in  S.  John's,  Edinburgh,  at  which  great  exception  was 
taken  by  the  Rev.  Edward  Craig,  of  S.  James'  (of  the  extreme 
"Low  Church,"  or  "Evangelical  Party"),  who  Printed  a  "Re 
monstrance"  to  the  Preacher,  who  in  turn  Printed  "A  Serious 
Expostulation"  to  the  fault-finder.  This  Synod  Sermon  advo 
cated  chiefly  Baptismal  Regeneration  />//  Water  and  the  Spirit, 
which  the  Scotch  Episcopal  Church  had  all  along  prominently 
held  to  and  taught ;  but  Mr.  Craig's  "  Remonstrance"  impeached 
the  Church  (which  he  had  come  down  from  England  to  find 
pabulum  in),  as  a  body,  as  not  "Preaching  Gospel  Truth." 

Mr.  Walker  was  also  Professor  of  Divinity  to  the  Candidates 
for  Holy  Orders,  and  a  general  strong  feeling  prevailed  that 
Bishop  Sandford  should  proceed  against  the  accuser  in  Synod. 
However,  a  Pastoral  Letter  was  substituted  therefor,  denouncing 
the  accuser  and  defending  the  accused.  Bishop  Jolly  also  came  to 
the  rescue  of  his  great  favourite  and  pupil,  James  Walker,  in  his 
"  Friendly  Address  on  Baptismal  Regeneration."  It  was  through 
Bishop  Walker's  counsel  that  Bishop  Jolly  willed  his  valuable 
Library  to  the  Church.  No.  8  Hill  Street,  Edinburgh,  was  bought 
and  fitted  up  for  the  Books,  and  as  the  Pantonian  Lecture 
Room  for  the  Theological  students.  When  the  School  Move  run 
swift,  and  ere  it  ran  out,  a  dozen  years  ago,  the  genteel  substan 
tial  house  in  Hill  Street  (purchased  by  funds  raised  by  Bishop 
Walker),  was  sold  by  his  successors  in  the  Trust,  in  an  hour  of 


328  DIOCESE  OF  FIFE. 

illusion,  to  help  to  buy  "  S.  Andrew's  Hall,"  in  Leitli  Wynd, 
which  shortly  proved  not  only  a  monument  of  deplorable  failure 
for  Education,  but  remains  as  the  "abomination  of  desolation." 
Bishop  Walker's  rotatory  iron  Consultarium  still  abides  here. 

He  Published  several  Charges,  and  an  Edition  of  Bishop 
Jolly's  "  Sunday  Services,"  with  a  Memoir,  in  1848. 

On  the  Death  of  Bishop  Sandford,  Dr.  Walker  was  all  but 
unanimously  Elected  his  Successor,  on  the  10th  February,  1830, 
—the  Rev.  Edward  Craig  of  S.  James'  Chapel,  Broughton  Place, 
and  his  Assistant  (the  Rev.  B.  B.  Golding),  refusing,  on  "old 
scores,"  to  Sign  the  usual  Deed.  He  was  Consecrated  at  Stirling 
on  Sunday,  7th  March,  1880,  on  which  occasion  Dr.  Michael 
Russell  Preached  a  renowned  Sermon  from  1  Timothy  iii.  14-15, 
on  "The  Historical  Evidence  for  the  Apostolical  Institution  of 
Episcopacy."  On  the  Death  of  Bishop  Gleig  in  1837,  Bishop 
Walker  succeeded  as  Primus. 

While  "Bishop  of  Fife,"  he  was  worried  for  years  by  the 
Vestry  Meetings  which  two  of  his  own  Brothers  carried  on  with 
an  equally  pugnacious  Parson,  named  John  Marshall,  who  was 
first  Assistant,  and  then  Successor,  to  his  namesake,  James 
Walker,  Minister  of  the  old  Episcopal  Chapel  at  Kirkcaldy. 
Marshall  literally  claimed  the  poicer  of  tJie  I'ei/s,  and  exchanged 
the  original  set  for  one  of  his  own,  keeping  the  gates  of  the  Fold 
open  and  shut  at  will — No  gdmii/diice  except  on  lusiness.  He  was 
a  Crow  that  kept  his  Church  Wardens  hard  at  work  to  Pluck. 
He  continued  the  like  litigious  propensities  with  Bishop  Tony 
and  Dean  Tony,  in  Letters  and  Pamphlets.  Afterwards  he 
built  S.  Catherine's  Church,  Blairgowrie,  in  honour  of  his  beloved 
spouse;  started  (for  a  year)  "The  Scottish  Episcopal  Church 
Times;"  smote  a  Policeman  on  the  pate  with  his  Gospel  flail, 
in  Portobello ;  "cut"  on  the  charge  of  assault;  became  dissi 
pated,  and,  as  a  dernier  resort,  "  shuffled  off  the  mortal  coil,"  thus 
spout  iiiy  Shakespare  in  his  last  literary  necessity. 

Bishops  Walker  and  Low  were  great  Confidantes,  and  rather 
good  Paintings  of  both,  before  they  were  Prelates,  adorn  the 
Parsonage  of  Pittenweem,  each  arrayed  in  a  black  gown,  the 
senior  having  a  white  head  and  the  junior  a  red.  These  have 


JAMES  WALKEE.  329 

never  been  Engraved.  In  1819  they  took  a  mutual  tour  through 
the  Western  Highlands.  An  Entry  in  the  "Preacher's  Book" 
of  S.  Andrew's,  Glasgow,  in  the  handwriting  of  Bishop  Low, 
Dated  12th  September,  1819,  evidences  that  they  rested  on  the 
Sabbath  Dan  m  Glasgow,  and  took  part  in  the  Services. 

It  was  usual,  50  years  ago,  when  Scotch  Bishops  visited 
periodically  the  Congregations  of  their  several  Districts  or 
Dioceses,  for  all  the  Members  to  come  forward,  kneel  before  the 
Altar,  and  receive  the  Bishop's  Blessing  with  Imposition  of 
Hands.  At  Social  Tea  Meetings — which  were  very  common  at  the 
end  of  last  Century,  and  quite  reserved  among  "Episcopalians" 
—as  one  and  two  arrived,  before  saluting  any  one,  they  went  first 
to  the  Bishop  sitting  in  the  best  arm-chair,  knelt  down,  and  got 
his  Blessing.  Before  taking  a  journey  by  land  or  water,  the 
Blessing  of  their  spiritual  Father  was  always  asked  by  "  Scottish 
Episcopalians."  Each  Bishop  had  a  formula  of  his  own :  this 
was  Bishop  Walker's : — "  God  Almighty  bless  tlice  with  His 
Holy  Spirit ;  guard  thee  in  thy  Going  out  and  Coming  in ;  keep 
thee  ever  in  His  Faith  and  Fear,  free  from  sin  and  safe  from 
danger.  Amen."  About  the  period  referred  to,  older  members 
were  in  the  habit  of  Reverencing  ton-arch  Hie  Altar,  before  leaving 
Church.  Not  many  years  ago,  this  custom  prevailed  at  Laurence - 
kirk;  albeit,  the  Incumbent  loiced  in  return,  imagining  that  the 
honour  was  meant  for  himself. 

In  Stage  Coach  days,  when  the  "Balcarres  Coach"  conveyed 
all  sorts  and  conditions  of  mankind  from  the  Metropolis  onward 
to  the  "East  Neuk  of  Fife,"  on  one -occasion  when  Bishops  Low 
and  Walker  were  crossing  the  Forth  in  a  Pinnace  at  Pettycur, 
the  sea  was  so  boisterous  as  to  alarm  even  a  Newhaven  Fish-wife, 

who  was  their  fellow-mariner.  "We're  a  naun  to  • ,"  quoth 

she,  grasping  Bishop  Walker,  as  a  tremendous  surge  nearly 
overwhelmed  them,  and  when  they  were  tolerably  soused.  At 
the  instant  there  was  no  reply  made  to  the  startling  aphorism  ; 
but  when  they  got  to  the  other  side,  Bishop  Walker  asked  the 
Oyster-woman  what  for  she  made  use  of  such  a  dreadful  excla 
mation  in  the  boat.  "A  weel,"  said  she,  "I'm  a  great  sinner, 
and  so  are  ye  tae,  and  so  is  yer  neebor  there  [pointing  to  Bishop 

VOL.  II.  2  T 


DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

',  and  tho'  we're  Lit  aff  tli'  noo,  if  we  get  our  fairin'  wese  a' 
gang  neist  timo."  This  was  a  case  of  "Jouk  and  let  the  jaw 
a  a  a;/  />//." 

Capt.  William  Walker,  another  brother  of  the  Bishop,  latterly 
for  several  years  resided  with  Bishop  Low,  as  a  companion  and 
boarder,  and  Died  and  was  Buried  at  Pittenwcem  in  January, 
1854.  Very  few  of  the  many  years'  bulky  Correspondence 
remain  which  passed  between  Bishops  Walker  and  Low,  as  the 
latter  requested  that  all  his  Letters  should  be  destroyed  or 
returned.  I  bewail  this,  as  I  should  have  used  up  the  whole, 
dispensing  with  any  inspector  of  weights  and  measures. 

Bishop  Walker  was  long  a  martyr  to  an  incurable  malady 

—viz.,  ossification  of  the  joints,  a  chronic  rheumatic  affection 

—which  lie  first  felt  symptoms  of  in  crossing  the  Alps.     For 

years  he  had  to  be  wheeled  about  in  a  chair.     He  was  well  read, 

knew  the  world,  was  benevolent  and  consistent.     He  Died  at  22 

Stafford  Street,  Edinburgh,  on  the  5th  March,  1841,  in  the  71st 

year  of  his  age.     He  was  Buried  on  the  South  side  of  S.  John's, 

Edinburgh,  where  a  Slab  marks  his  Grave.     A  Tablet  is  also 

placed  within  the  Chapel,  on  the  North  of  the  Altar,  near  Bishop 

Sandford's. 


LX.  PATRICK  TORRY,  D.D.,     A.D.  1841-52, 

Was  Born  at  Pennan,  in  the  Parish  of  King  Edward  (pro 
nounced  King  Eddurt),  Aberdeenshire,  on  the  27th  of  December, 
1763.  The  Fishing  Hamlet  of  Pennan  was  renowned  for 
Smuggling.  The  primitive  Cottages  are  romantically  perched 
like  nests  high  up  on  steep  rocks.  As  is  noticed  below  in 
Rhyme,  the  "but  and  ben"  where  Tony  first  saw  this  world's 
light  was  suddenly  demolished,  and  his  mother  and  a  brother 
were  smothered  by  the  sad  accident.  He  seems  to  have  been 
Ordained  and  settled  at  Arradoul  at  the  time  of  the  casualty. 

His  grandfather,  William  Tony,  a  Farmer  at  Drakemyres, 
in  the  same  Parish,  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  Century,  had 
five  sons,  two  of  whom  may  be  noticed  here,  the  one  as  the 
instructor  of  the  future  Bishop,  and  the  other  as  his  father. 


PATRICK  TORRY. 


331 


James  Torry,  the  second  son,  Born  in  1715,  was  a  zealous 
Jacobite,  and  followed  Prince  Charles  Edward  in  1745,  as  Volun 
teer  with  Sir  Harry  Innes,  in  Lord  Pitsligo's  Regiment  of  Horse. 
Like  many  other  devoted  followers  of  the  Stuart  cause,  after  the 
failure  of  the  Prince's  Expedition,  he  was  compelled  to  abscond ; 
and  his  nephew  used  to  mention  that  he  had  often  been  in  the 
hiding-place,  on  the  banks  of  the  Garneston,  where  the  refugee 
was  obliged  to  conceal  himself,  and  where  his  mother  secretly 
supplied  him  with  food.  When  the  Act  of  Indemnity  permitted 
him  to  go  at  large,  he  returned  to  Elgin,  where  he  had  previously 
carried  on  the  trade  of  a  "Weaver,  or,  to  give  a  more  dignified 
title,  a  Manufacturer  and  Dyer  of  woollen  cloth ;  but  not  finding 
encouragement,  on  account  of  his  Political  principles,  and  the 
part  he  had  taken,  he  went  back  to  his  native  Parish  and  set  up 
a  School  at  a  place  called  the  Craig  of 
Gardenstown,  or  Garneston.  Under  the 
tuition  of  this  uncle,  young  Torry  (our 
Bishop)  received  the  rudiments  of  his  edu 
cation,  and  continued  his  Pupil  for  several 
years.  He  afterwards  attended  a  School  at 
the  Village  of  Cumineston,  to  which  he 
walked  daily  from  his  father's  house,  a  dis 
tance  of  five  miles. 

Thomas,  the  fifth  son  of  William  Torry, 

Shepherd^  with  the  Greek  anc^  tnc  father  of  the  Bishop,  was  just  a 
Motto,  from  Acts  xx.  •>  i,  Weaver  at  the  Wauk  Mill  of  Garneston, 
fi«SkC  llcctl  to  n11  the  where  he  also  occupied  a  small  Farm  on  the 
property  of  the  Earl  of  Fife.  He  Married 
Jane,  the  daughter  of  William  Watson,  a  neighbouring  Farmer 
at  Mains  of  Balmaud. 

In  those  days,  when  the  use  of  Tea  had  not  been  long  intro 
duced  into  Scotland,  to  possess  a  Tea-kettle  seems  to  have  been 
a  mark  of  some  distinction ;  and  the  Bishop  used  to  tell  that  his 
grandfather  had  the  third  Tea-kettle  in  the  Parish — the  other 
two  being  possessed  by  the  Laird  of  Craigston  and  the  Minister. 
Watson  was  a  Presbyterian ;  and  though  his  son-in-law  was 
brought  up  in  the  Church,  he  was  induced  to  join  in  Religious 


Silver  Matrix,  now  in 
the  Antiquarian  Museum , 
Edinburgh.  The  Good 


DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Worship  with  his  wife.  Tims,  Mr.  Tony  was  Born  and  Educated 
a  member  of  the  "Establishment;"  but  he  probably  imbibed 
from  his  Uncle  James  not  only  those  strong-  Jacobite  feelings 
which  clung  to  him  through  life,  but  also  the  germs  of  those 
Principles,  which,  when  cherished  by  subsequent  study,  led  him 
to  seek  the  Ministry  in  the  suffering  Church  of  his  Fathers.  Of 
that  Church  his  uncle  was  a  devoted  member ;  and  the  Bishop 
used  to  relate  how,  when  he  was  his  pupil,  he  had  often  listened 
at  his  chamber  door  during  the  intervals  of  teaching,  to  hear  him 
reading  aloud  the  Services  of  the  Church. 

The  Piev.  J.  M.  Neale,  in  his  "Life  and  Times  of  Bishop 
Torry"  (from  which  this  Sketch  is  mainly  gathered  and  abbrevi 
ated),  states,  at  page  3—"  As  far  as  can  be  discovered,  Mr.  Torry 
never  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  a  University  or  College  education. 
But  his  industry  and  perseverance,  joined  to  good  natural  talents, 
triumphed  over  this  disadvantage;  for  he  became  an  accurate 
Greek  and  Latin  Scholar,  and  acquired  a  considerable  knowledge 
of  Hebrew  and  Mathematics."  But,  from  Letters  in  Dean 
Tony's  possession,  it  is  certain  that  his  father  went  through  the 
usual  curriculum  at  Marischal  College,  Aberdeen. 

James  Watson,  his  mother's  youngest  brother,  was,  first, 
Teacher  of  the  Parish  School  of  Selkirk,  and  afterwards  Hector 
of  the  Grammar  School  of  Haddington.  At  this  latter  place,  Mr. 
Torry  became  his  uncle's  assistant,  and  continued  with  him 
about  a  year,  when  he  went,  at  the  age  of  18,  to  be  Teacher  of 
the  Parish  School  of  Lonmay,  Aberdeenshire.  He  did  not, 
however,  remain  long  in  that  situation.  Though  hitherto  a 
Presbyterian,  he  had,  no  doubt,  as  has  been  hinted,  early 
acquired  from  his  uncle  at  Garneston  a  predilection  for  "Episco 
pacy."  But  it  was  not  till  he  settled  at  Lonmay  that  he  seems  to 
have  had  serious  thoughts  of  submitting  to  the  Church.  There 
he  formed  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Ptev.  William 
Sangster,  the  Incumbent  of  the  Episcopal  Congregation,  a 
zealous  Jacobite  of  the  old  school.  From  his  intercourse  with 
him,  his  views  in  favour  of  "  Episcopacy"  were  greatly  confirmed  ; 
and  they  were  afterwards  ripened  by  connexion  with  a  far  more 
celebrated  man,  with  whom  he  went  to  reside  about  the  month 


PATRICK  TORRY.  333 

of  June,  1782 — the  Key.  John  Skinner,  at  Linshart,  in  the  neigh 
bouring  Parish  of  Longsicle,  the  father  of  John  Skinner,  Bishop 
of  Aberdeen,  and  Primus  of  the  Scottish  Church,  and  grandfather 
of  Bishop  William  Skinner,  his  son,  who  filled  both  Offices. 

Thoroughly  charitable  and  tolerant  as  he  ever  was  towards 
those  with  whom  he  differed  in  sentiment,  it  was  therefore  under 
the  most  conscientious  persuasion  of  the  rectitude  of  the  change 
which  he  made,  that  Mr.  Tony  sought  for  and  obtained  admis 
sion  to  the  Order  of  Deacons,  at  the  hands  of  Dr.  Kilgour, 
Bishop  of  Aberdeen,  in  Sept.,  1782.  He  could  hardly  have  had  a 
better  instructor  than  Bishop  Kilgour,  who  was  a  worthy  Succes 
sor  of  Bishops  Archibald  Campbell  and  Rattray.  He  was  deeply 
read  in  the  early  Liturgies,  well  acquainted  with  Ecclesiastical 
History,  and  the  last  Primus  who  filled  that  Office  in  the  time  of 
persecution.  The  disinterestedness  of  his  choice  was  further 
tested  by  the  fact  that  it  was  no  wealthy  or  well- endowed  Church 
to  which  he  now  joined  himself,  but  one  still  suffering  many 
hardships,  and  under  the  pressure  of  seyere  Penal  Laws,  imposed 
for  her  former  adherence  to  the  dynasty  of  the  Stuarts. 

It  was  the  scarcity  of  Clergy  induced  by  this  state  of  things 
which  alone  justified  the  investing  with  Holy  Orders  a  young 
man  like  Tony,  who  was  three  months  under  the  age  of  nine 
teen — a  thing  which  happened  also  in  the  case  of  some  of  his 
Contemporaries,  among  whom  was  his  intimate  friend  and 
affectionate  companion  for  many  years,  the  holy  and  learned 
Bishop  Jolly.  After  his  Ordination,  Mr.  Tony  was  immediately 
sent  to  minister  to  the  Congregation  at  Arradoul,  in  the  Parish 
of  Kathven  [Raffcn],  Banffshire. 

Bishop  Tony  states,  in  a  Letter  (August,  1847)  to  Lord 
Forbes,  sanctioning  the  erection  of  a  Cathedral  in  Perth,  that  he 
had  "  a  small  Congregation  as  an  Appendage  to  Arradoul,  to  which 
he  discharged  the  Pastoral  duties  every  alternate  Sunday,  in  the 
afternoon,  for  five  or  six  years,  in  the  Kitchen  of  a  Shopkeeper 
in  the  Village  where  that  little  Flock  was  congregated."  I  think 
that  this  "  Appendage"  must  have  been  Fochabers.  Mr.  Shand, 
who  succeeded,  took  charge  of  Fochabers  as  well  as  Arradoul ; 
and  in  a  Letter  in  my  possession,  Bishop  Macfarlane  claims  both 


y8-i  DIOCESE  OE  ST.  ANDEEWS. 

places  as  in  the  Diocese  of  Moray,  and  interdicts  Mr.  Sliand 
from  taking  counsel  from  Bishop  Skinner.  Mr.  Murdoch,  of 
Keith,  officiated  alternately  at  llutlivcn  [liivcn],  Keith,  and 
Fochabcrs — in  the  latter,  for  many  years,  in  Mrs.  Humphrey's 
Peat-House  (the  successor  of  the  Shopkeeper's  Kitchen) ;  but 
this  was  only  an  arrangement  between  him  and  Mr.  Shand. 
Before  Mr.  Tony's  Appointment  to  Arradoul,  I  have  MS. 
Sermons  which  were  Preached  at  Cowfurrach,  a  short  distance 
to  the  west. 

Probably  about  this  time  it  was  that  the  catastrophe  occurred 
which  has  been  noticed  at  the  commencement.  "  Tullochgorum," 
his  old  friend,  composed  on  the  occasion  this  Poetical  Piece, 
addressing  the  mourner  as  "Lorenzo":— 

To  a  Yount/  Cli'i't/>/w(tn, 


How  hard,  Lorenzo,  is  the  boon  you  ask, 

And  how  unequal  I  to  such  a  task '? 

I,  whose  weak  muse,  borne  down  with  weight  of  years, 

O'er  common  griefs  might  shed  some  tender  tears, 

But  finds  her  powers  of  lamentation  fail, 

And  sinks  and  sickens  at  thy  doleful  tale  ! 

A  Mother  !  (ah,  the  venerable  name, 
Which  my  young  lips  were  never  taught  to  frame) 
She,  whose  warm  bowels  form'd  thy  infant  span, 
Whose  tenderest  watchings  nurs'd  thee  up  to  man ; 
She,  earthly  image  of  the  highest  love, 
Which  ev'ii  the  3*earnings  of  a  God  could  move  ! 

A  Brother,  too  !  the  next  congenial  tie 
Of  strongest  force  in  nature's  symmetry  ! 
Thy  partner  thro'  a  course  of  prattling  years, 
In  all  youth's  fondnesses,  and  all  its  fears  ! 
Both  in  a  moment  robb'd  of  vital  breath, 
And  quick  and  sudden  hurry 'd  into  death ! — 
No  hasty  fever,  110  slow-pac'd  decay, 
To  snatch  the  young  or  wear  the  old  away. 
The  humble  cot,  which,  for  convenience  rear'd, 
Harbour'd  no  mischief,  and  no  danger  fear'd, 
Where,  by  the  cheerful  fire  in  peace  secure, 
They  now  had  spent  the  pleasant  evening  hour — 
Crush'd  all  at  once  by  one  stupendous  shock 
Of  tumbling  rubbish  from  th'  impending  rock ! 
No  sturdy  pillars  to  support  the  weight 
Of  such  a  burthen,  thrown  from  such  a  height ; 
The  unsuspecting  victims,  half  undrest, 
In  preparation  for  a  sweet  night's  rest ; 


PATRICK  TORRY. 


335 


No  boding  omen  heard,  no  warning  given, 
No  time  to  lift  their  souls  and  eyes  to  heaven — 
Bury'd  beneath  the  enormous  mass  all  round, 
And,  breathing,  tomb'd  in  dust  above  the  ground. 
Their  shatter'd  limbs  all  into  atoms  crash'd, 
And  bones  and  bowels  to  one  chaos  dash'd  ! 

But  why  attempt  description  ?  words  are  vain  ! 
The  dreadful  ruin  mocks  my  languid  strain  : 
And  does  my  friend  need  counsel  how  to  bear 
This  wound  so  piercing,  a  stroke  indeed  severe  '? 
Then  think  on  what  thy  hoary  sire  must  feel 
(For  sure  thy  sire  had  not  a  heart  of  steel), 
When  by  next  dawn  returned  from  distant  toil, 
In  hopes  of  welcome  from  thy  mother's  smile, 
He  saw,  and  star'd,  and  gazed  at  this  and  that, 
And  hop'd,  and  fear'd,  and  wish'd  he  knew  not  what  ? 
Till,  like  a  voice,  he  heard  from  menial  maid, 
With  wife  and  son  in  dire  sepulchre  laid, 
Who  ten  long  hours  had  groaned  an  age  of  pain, 
And,  just  expiring,  breath'd  the  how  and  when. 
Now  view  him  in  a  gulph  of  horror  cast, 
His  heart-strings  breaking,  and  his  eyes  aghast— 
Like  pictur'd  patience,  all  benumb'd  he  stands, 
And  tries  to  lift,  but  drops  his  trembling  hands. 
I  No  groan  his  heart  emits,  his  eye  no  tear — 
1  Good  heaven  !  what  more  can  mortals  suffer  here  '? 

'Tis  this,  you  say,  that  aggravates  the  smart, 
?Tis  this  that  doubly  rends  the  filial  heart. 
True,  unflcdg'd  sufferer,  thou  hast  much  to  do,         • 
To  act  the  Sun,  and  shine  the  Christian  too  : 
Insensible  to  this  what  heart  can  be, 
Not  form'd  of  marble,  or  hewn  out  of  tree  ! 
Lorenzo's  heart,  tlio  cut,  must  not  repine 
At  what,  it  knows,  comes  from  a  Hand  Divine  ; 
But  strive  in  due  submission  to  comply, 
Nor  boldly  dare  to  guess  the  reason  why. 
The  philosophic  sage,  from  self's  proud  school, 
May  act,  or  feign  to  act,  the  heroic  fool — 
At  nature's  feelings  may  pretend  to  mock, 
And  wisely  sullen,  stand  th'  appalling  shock. 
The  heav'n-taught  Christian  may,  and  must  do  more — 
May  grieve  from  Nature,  must  from  Grace  adore  : 
Adore  the  love  of  e'en  a  chast'ning  God, 
And  kiss  the  gracious  Hand  that  wields  the  rod. 

A  year  after  receiving  the  Diaconate,  Mr.  Tony  was  invested 
with  the  Order  of  Priesthood  by  the  same  Bishop  who  had 
Ordained  him  Deacon.  While  at  Arracloul,  old  Gordon  of 
Cairnfield  one  Sunday  stood  up  in  his  Pew  and  denounced  Mr. 
Tony's  Sermon,  as  "not  Gospel,  nor  Church  of  England  doc- 


33G 


DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 


trine."     The  Homily  was  handed  to  "Caimey"  on  the  spot, 
with  a  request  that  he  would   send  it  to  the  Bishop.     "The 
Bishop!    and  pray  who  the  -       -  is  the  Bishop?"   quoth  the 
Laird;    "this  Chapel  is  my  property,  and  on  my  estate;  and, 
besides,    both   Bishop   Kilgour   and   Bishop  Petrie   have   been 
battling  ever  since  I  remember  as  to  which  of  them  the  Enzie 
belongs.     I  shall  be  Bishop  here  myself."     This  colloquy  dumb 
founded  the  simple  fisher-congregation,  who  threatened  to  throttle 
"Cairney,"     The  brawl   ended  in   Mr.  Torry  being  called  to 
Peterhead.    The  Eev.  Alex.  Shand  (of  the  Shands  of  Templeland 
in  Forgue),  his  Successor,  kept  the  fisher-wives  in  such  terror  of 
coming  late  into  Church,  that  they  pulled  off  their  shoes  at  the 
door,  in  case  of  noise.     Dean  Shand's  eagle  eye  was  terrific  to 
transgressors  of  the  weaker  sex.     He  was  regular  in  attending 
the  Markets  at  Keith,  to  sell  -  stirks."   His  faithful  housekeeper, 
Jenny  Simpson,  devotedly  pinned  up  her  master's  coat-tails  on 
such  journeys,  in  case  of  being  soiled  by  the  sweat  of  the  pony. 
He  was  very  asthmatic,  and  was  obliged  to  chew  black  sugar  in 
the  Pulpit  to  encourage  his  elocution. 

Besides  the  care  of  his  Flock  and  his  Professional  Studies, 
Mr.  Torry  devoted  a  portion  of  his  time  to   secular  teaching, 
and  for   that  purpose  received  into  his  house  young  men  as 
boarders  and  day  scholars.     One  of  his  pupils  was  the  son  of 
Sir  James  Gordon  of  Letterfourie,  the  head  of  a  leading  Roman 
Catholic  Family  in  Banffshire.    There  were  many  other  Families 
adherents  of  this  Faith  in  that  part  of  the  Country ;  and  Mr. 
Torry  was  brought  much  into  contact  with  the  members  of  the 
E.  C.  Church,  both  Laity  and  Clergy.    This  led  him  to  study  care 
fully  her  peculiar  dogmas,  for  the  purpose  of  Controversy  and  for 
the  satisfaction  of  his  own  mind,  and  with  the  view  of  enabling 
him  the  better  to  instruct  the  people  committed  to  his  Charge. 
The  Roman  Catholic  Priests  in  that  quarter,  called  the  Enzie, 
had  mostly  been  educated  in  Spain,  and  were  generally  men  of 
high    attainments    as   well    as    of  superior   manners;   and   his 
occasional  intercourse  with  them  at  the  houses  of  the  Gentry,  as 
well  as  elsewhere,  must  have  been  a  severe  trial  of  his  faithfulness 
to  his  own  Church.     He  had  frequent  salutes  with  the  great 


PATRICK  TOPiRY.  337 

scholar  and  eccentric  character,  the  Rev.  Alex.  Geddes,  LL.D., 
Priest  at  Auchenhalrig,  who  was  rather  a  Bore  to  his  Bishop  at 
Preshome — the  Right  Rev.  Dr.  George  Hay,  whose  valuable 
"Life  and  Times"  are  given  in  the  JOURNAL  AND  APPENDIX  to 
this  Work.  Dr.  Geddes,  in  defiance  of  all  Remonstrances  from 
his  Bishop  and  Brethren,  Published  three  large  4to  Vols.  of  "A 
New  Translation  of  the  Pentateuch."  This  is  wonderfully 
ingenious  and  subtle,  but  full  of  private  judgment,  upsetting  the 
whole  received  Text,  as  handed  down  and  owned  by  the  Church. 
Geddes  was  small  of  stature,  but  a  prodigy  for  intellect.  He 
was  continually  getting  into  scrapes.  If  his  Bishop-  wrote  one 
Letter  to  him,  three  in  return  were  sure  to  be  forthcoming.  He 
occasionally  found  his  way  into  Presbyterian  Kirks,  and  was 
threatened  with  Suspension  by  Bishop  Hay,  for  being  on  too 
intimate  terms  with  the  Minister  of  Banff,  and  for  hearing 
Sermons  within  the  Parish  Kirk.  He  is  said  to  have  defied  the 
Fulmcn  Eccles.  thus — "You  may  take  off  my  head,  but  try  and 
take  off  my  feet."  Skinner  of  Linshart,  "  Tullochgorum," 
attributes  these  humorous  Scottish  Verses  to  Geddes  : — 

"  There  was  a  wee  wifickie  was  comin'  frae  the  fair, 
Had  gotten  a  little  drapikie,  which  bred  her  mcikil  care  ; 
It  took  upo'  the  wine's  heart,  and  she  began  to  spew, 
And  co'  the  wee  witiekie  I  wish  I  Linna  feu. 
I  wish  I  binna  fou,''  Ac. 

The  following  Paper,  entitled  "A  Fewr  General  Remarks  on 
the  Modern  Plan  of  Correcting  the  Original  Hebrew  Scriptures, 
with  some  Critical  Remarks  on  the  Rev.  Dr.  Geddes'  Specimens 
of  a  New  Translation  of  the  Holy  Bible,"  was  written  by  Patrick 
Torry  in  1787,  when  a  very  young  man  :— 

The  great  and  arduous  undertaking  of  a  New  Translation  of  the  Holy 
Bible  by  Dr.  Geddes,  is  now,  it  seems,  nearly  or  altogether  finished.  A 
Specimen  of  the  Work  hath  been  offered  to  the  public,  and  the  whole  is  soon 
to  make  its  appearance  in  the  world. 

The  Author's  inducement  for  undertaking  such  a  laborious  task,  ho 
declares  to  have  been,  "That  he  might  thereby  furnish  those  of  his  own 
Persuasion  with  a  more  perfect  Translation  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  than 
has  hitherto  been  made,  at  least  in  the  English  language."  This  was 
certainly  a  laudable  design  ;  and  should  his  Translation  fall  short  of  the 
perfection  of  our  present  Translation,  we  may  say  of  Dr.  Geddes  what  the 
Poet  says  of  Phaeton,  "  Magnis  tamen  excidit  ausis." 

VOL.   II.  2  U 


DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

The  pretensions  of  this  Work  to  superiority  arc  chiefly  founded  upon 
corrections  which  the  Author  has  made  upon  the  Original  Hebrew,  which, 
by  his  Accounts,  hath  been  transmitted  (down)  to  us  in  such  a  mutilated 
and  imperfect  state  (alarming  thought!)  that  scarce  any  profane  Author  has 
undergone  so  many  corruptions.  To  restore,  therefore,  the  Hebrew  SS.  to 
their  original  purity,  he  says  the  labours  of  the  learned  in  this  Age  have 
been  laudably  exerted.  And  the  Specimen  now  before  us  is  ushered  into 
tin' world  with  a  positive  assertion  that,  among  the  learned,  it  is  now  no 
longer  a  doubt  that  the  Hebrew  SS.  have  been  handed  down  to  us  in  a 
mutilated  and  imperfect  state.  The  truth  of  this  assertion,  however,  may 
very  boldly  be  called  in  question.  Many  of  the  learned,  perhaps  the  greater 
part  of  them,  are  abundantly  convinced  of  the  perfect  purity  and  integrity  of 
tllls  part  of  the  Oracles  of  God,  and  have  written  so  forcibly  and  demon- 
vely  in  vindication  of  their  genuineness,  as  might  convince  every  one 
to  their  comfort,  that,  by  the  good  Providence  of  God,  they  remain  "pure 
and  perfect,  to  convert  the  soul,  to  give  wisdom  to  the  simple,  to  enlighten 
the  eyes  of  our  understanding,  and  direct  our  footsteps  in  the  way  that 
leadeth  to  eternal  felicity  and  glory."  (Psalm  119th.)  I  shall  mention  a 
few  who  still  remain  iirm  in  this  belief,  and  who  may  justly  be  called  the 
Luminaries  of  the  Church  of  England  in  the  present  Age,  viz.: — Dr. 
Hodges,  Provost  of  Oriel  College.  Oxford;  the  llcv.  Mr.  Comings  of  Oxford 
College  ;  Dr.  Home,  President  of  Magdalene  College,  Oxford ;  the  Ivev.  Mr. 
Holloway,  Author  of  "Hebrew  Originals;"  the  Eev.  Mr.  Bate,  Author  of  a 
Hebrew  Lexicon  ;  the  Eev.  Mr.  Parkhurst,  Author  of  a  Hebrew  Lexicon  and 
a  Greek  one  ;  and  the  liev.  Mr.  Jones.  All  these  (and  there  may  be  many 
more  with  whose  Writings  I  am  not  acquainted)  have  either  written  formal 
Treatises  in  defence  of  the  present  Hebrew  Text,  or  have  occasionally  shown 
their  conviction  of  its  integrity  in  the  course  of  their  Writings.  These  are 
all  men  confessedly  learned,  and  of  great  critical  skill  in  the  Hebrew 
language.  How  then  can  Dr.  (ieddes  be  answerable  for  boldly  asserting 
that  ••  it  is  now  without  a  doubt  among  the  learned  that  the  Hebrew  SS. 
have  been  transmitted  down  to  us  mutilated  and  imperfect,"  when  so  many 
truly  learned  men  have  strenuously  defended  their  integrity  ?  But  it  should 
seem  that,  with  some  Writers,  such  only  are  to  be  accounted  learned  who  have 
espoused  their  side  of  the  question  ;  and  a  bold  assertion  of  any  Author  that 
all  the  learned  are  of  his  opinion,  is  very  apt  to  excite  admiration,  and 
procure  implicit  credit  from  such  as  Avill  not  be  at  the  pains,  or  have  not  an 
opportunity,  of  enquiring  into  the  truth  of  the  matter. 

"  That  such  exertions,"  as  those  of  Kemiicot,  De  Eosse,  and  Geddes, 
"  were  not  sooner  made,  was  owing  to  an  inveterate  but  unaccountable 
prejudice  that  the  Bible  was  a  Book  that  did  not  need  to  be  corrected,  but 
was  entire  and  unpolluted  in  all  its  parts."  And  was  not  this  a  "prejudice" 
which  every  pious  person  would  wish  to  be  true,  who  allows  the  Word  of 
God  to  be  the  xolc  rule  of  h  in  faith  in  id  conduct?  Is  it  not  much  more 
comfortable  to  any  sincere  Christian  to  be  impressed  with  the  belief  that  the 
Oracles  of  God  remain  pure  and  uncorrupted,  than  to  believe  that  they 
abound  with  many  and  great  mistakes  '?  For,  if  the  Bible  alone  can  display 
the  awful  proceedings  of  Him  who  is  infinitely  exalted  above  the  reach  of  the 
mere  human  eye  ;  if  it  is  from  it  alone  that  we  have  the  least  glimpse  of  the 
Divine  economy  with  regard  to  man ;  if  this  holy  Book  only  can  instruct  us 
in  the  knowledge  of  our  Original,  in  the  design  of  our  Creation,  and  in  the 


PATRICK  TOlUiY.  389 

means  of  arriving  at  the  end  proposed;  if  by  this  celestial  light  only  we  see 
the  commencement,  the  progressive  advances,  and  the  final  completion  of 
that  amazing  plan,  whose  object  was  human  happiness,  begun,  carried  on, 
and  perfected  by  Him  who  supports  the  various  relations  of  Creator, 
Redeemer,  and  Saiictifier  of  Mankind ;  if,  I  say,  all  these  advantages  arise 
from  the  Word  of  God,  and,  doubtless,  they  can  be  derived  from  110  other 
source — thru  it  is  of  the  last  consequence  to  have  had  it  transmitted  to  us 
pure  and  uncoutaminatcd  from  human  corruption,  and  to  convey  it  down  to 
the  latest  posterity  in  the  same  state.  On  this  not  much,  but  all,  depends; 
as  no  human  knowledge,  were  it  a  thousand  times  greater  than  it  is,  could 
make  amends  for  the  want  of  that  knowledge,  which  alone  can  be  derived 
from  Scriptures  of  eternal  truth. 

But  let  us  consider  for  a  moment  the  consequences  which  must 
infallibly  ensue  from  this  modern  plan,  should  it  become  general,  of  exposing 
the  Scriptures  of  God  as  mutilated  and  corrupted,  and  of  boldly  adventuring 
to  correct  them. 

In  the  first  place,  it  must  greatly  tend  to  invalidate  their  authority ; 
for,  if  every  man  who  pretends  to  a  knowledge  of  Hebrew  is  to  have  a  liberty 
of  correcting  the  Sacred  Text  at  pleasure,  the  Word  of  God  must,  in  a  little 
time,  by  additions  and  diminutions,  he  no  longer  a  Scheme  revealed  from 
Heaven,  but  must  dwindle  down  into  a  human  composition.  If  every  bold 
critic  may  alter  the  Original  Text  merely  from  conjecture  (which  is  one  of 
Dr.  G.'s  sources  of  emendation),  it  is  obvious  the  authority  of  the  SS.  must 
daily  decrease,  and  their  evidence  be  less  and  less  to  be  depended  on.  For, 
then  every  such  critic  will  allow  himself  the  liberty  of  altering  the  Original 
Text  with  little,  if  any,  more  evidence  than  what  proceeds  from  the  greater 
propriety  which  they  fancy  another  expression  might  have.  This  was  a 
liberty  which  Kennicot  (whom  Dr.  G.  louldly  extols  on  every  occasion) 
very  frequently  allowed  himself.  And  his  Antagonist,  the  Eev.  Mr.  Comings 
of  Oxford  College,  said  enough  to  convince  him  of  the  danger  of  his  plan, 
and  that  more  caution  and  farther  examination  were  necessary  for  him,  as 
all  the  Texts  he  condemned  as  erroneous,  appeared,  when  attentively  and 
cautiously  examined,  truly  i/lnn'oiis  <unl  <lirin/>.  From  all  this,  it  may 
justly  be  inferred  that  every  one  is  at  liberty  to  propose  to  the  World  any 
Interpretation  of  a  Passage  which  the  language  will  bear,  and  no  other  part 
of  Scripture  discountenances  ;  but  none  can  be  allowed  the  liberty  of  altcruK/ 
any  Passage  to  remove  a  difficulty  which  time  and  patience  may  clear  up. 
To  do  this,  is  assuming  a  power  with  which  no  creature  can  be  invested — a 
power  of  making  Jehovah  speak  what  we  please,  instead  of  what  His  own 
all-comprehensive  wisdom  has  determined. 

Moreover,  if  Christian  Writers  are  thus  to  publish  to  the  world  their 
objections  to  the  supposed  corruptions  of  the  Bible,  and  pronounce  them 
unanswerable,  the  consequences  must  be  very  pernicious  among  the  less 
knowing,  especially  the  Laity.  For,  tlio  these  objections  should  be  fully 
answered,  and  the  difficulties  entirely  cleared  up  to  the  satisfaction  of  proper 
judges,  yet  the  less  skilful  in  these  matters,  who  know  not  the  merits  of 
either  cause,  will  be  naturally  led  to  have  less  reverence  for  and  dependence 
upon  a  Book,  the  integrity  of  which  is  so  evidently  controverted. 

Again,  should  it  become  customary  among  the  Ministers  of  Christ  thus 
to  correct  the  Original  Scriptures  at  pleasure,  other  evils  must  necessarily 
ensue,  such  as  these  following : — No  man  could  then  refer  to  his  neighbour's 


a  10  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Bible,  nor  would  the  Word  of  God  give  tlio  same  command  to  any  two 
individuals.  Moreover,  what  was  tacitly  allowed  to  be  the  authentic 
Revelation  of  Heaven  to-day,  might,  when  found  inconvenient  to  retain  it, 
bo  rejected  as  the  insertion  of  some  bold  and  careless  Transcriber.  And 
farther  still,  whatever  difficulty  was  owing  to  the  small  proficiency  of  the 
Header  in  Sacred  Knowledge,  this  would  be  charged  on  the  Scripture  itself, 
which  must  therefore  be  pronounced  unintelligible  as  it  stands  at  present, 
and  must  be  altered  as  every  one  should  judge  proper.  This  Dr.  Kcnnicot's 
conduct  obliges  us  to  think  would  be  the  case  ;  for  the  alterations  which  he 
introduced  were  both  many  and  considerable. :|:  And  we  are  not  to  suppose 
that  this  rage  for  correcting  the  Original  Scriptures  of  God  will  terminate  in 
the  labours  of  Kennicot  or  Geddes;  others  will,  no  doubt,  arise  and  applaud 
t liem  for  having  gone  so  far,  but  will  lament  that  they  had  not  gone 
farther,  and  will  therefore  set  strenuously  to  work  to  supply  their  defects; 
that  is,  in  plain  terms,  to  mould  the  Bible  to  their  own  shape,  or  make  it 
speak  their  own  sentiments.  Such  bold  and  daring  attempts  have  already 
bi'cn  realised  in  the  person  of  Dr.  Priestley,  who,  as  his  fellow-labourer, 
Price  says  of  him  by  way  of  commendation,  "  Hath  with  magnanimous 
openness  rejected  the  Epistles  of  S.  Paul  as  spurious  and  not  worthy  of  a 
place  in  the  Sacred  Code." 

It  is  therefore,  in  my  opinion,  highly  necessary  to  discourage  such 
unaccountable  freedoms  with  the  Word  of  God,  and  so  prevent  them  from 
becoming  general.  This  Sacred  Book  is  not  to  be  trifled  with.  The 
Almighty  hath  set  His  Sacred  Seal  to  the  following  Decree,  and  determined 
for  ever  the  duty  of  His  creature,  man — "  If  any  man  shall  add  unto  the 
things  of  this  Book,  the  Lord  shall  add  nnto  him  the  Plagues  that  are 
written  therein.  And  if  any  man  shall  take  away  therefrom,  God  shall  take 
away  his  part  out  of  the  Book  of  Life,  and  out  of  the  Holy  City."  For  this 
is  the  treasure  sent  from  Heaven  to  enrich  the  sons  of  men ;  this  the  light 
which  is  to  direct  their  feet  into  the  way  of  everlasting  peace.  This  Sacred 
Depositum,  therefore,  the  Church  of  God  must  deliver  down  to  future  Ages. 
To  invalidate  its  evidence,  is  to  strike  at  the  root  of  human  happiness,  and 
will  never  be  allowed  by  that  God  who  has  promised  to  His  Church  that 
"  the  gates  of  Hell  shall  never  prevail  against  it." 

These  objections  (and  many  more  might  bo  made)  to  the  modern  plan 
of  correcting  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  are  by  no  means  obviated  by  asserting 
that  there  are  a  vast  number  of  Hebrew  MSS.  which  differ  from  the  present 
Printed  Copy,  and  that,  therefore,  the  present  Copy  may  be  corrected  upon 
their  authority  and  from  other  helps,  as  the  Oriental  Versions,  the  Septua- 
gint  Translation,!  and  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch.  For  here  it  may  be 
asked,  Do  the  Original  SS.  contain  any  internal  marks  of  contamination? 
Dr.  G.  indeed  says  so ;  and  that  to  Translate  them  one  must  make  sense  of 
nonsense,  and  give  a  meaning  where  there  is  none;  but  for  this  we  have,  as 

;:  The  late  learned  ami  pious  Dr.  Johnson's  observation  on  Kennicot's  Biblical 
labours  is  highly  noticeable.  AVlicn  some  of  the  Literati  at  Edinburgh  were 
mentioning  the  great  expectations  that  were  formed  from  Kennicot's  researches, 
Johnson  sternly  replied,  "  I  know  no  crime  so  great  a  man  can  be  guilty  of,  as 
poisoning  the  sources  of  eternal  truth  !" 

•f-  This  was  a  Translation  of  the  Bible  into  Greek,  by  order  of  Ptolemy,  King  of 
Egypt. 


PATRICK  TORRY.  341 

yet,  only  his  bare  assertion.  Dr.  Kennicot  went  farther.  He  Published 
"An  Examination  of  the  State  of  the  Printed  Hebrew  Text  of  the  Old 
Testament,"  in  which  he  produced  a  number  of  Passages,  and  brought  them 
as  arguments  for  the  corruption  of  the  Original  Text.  This  Work,  however, 
was  replied  to  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Comings  of  Oxford,  with  great  candour,  zeal, 
and  Christian  meekness.  The  Passages  objected  to  were  re-examined,  their 
meaning  shown  to  be  quite  agreeable  to  the  analogy  of  faith,  and,  in  short, 
were  evinced  to  be  a  part  of  the  true  Revelation  of  God. 

Hitherto,  then,  no  man  has  been  able  to  prove  that  the  Original  Hebrew 
SS.  exhibit  any  inward  evidence  of  corruption.  Difficulties  they  do 
contain ;  and,  doubtless,  there  are  many  Passages,  the  meaning  of  which 
will  never  be  fully  comprehended  till  we  arrive  at  those  higher  regions, 
where  we  shall  no 'longer  sec  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  shall  behold  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  beaming  forth  in  unclouded  majesty  and  glory.  But, 
till  death  shall  be  swallowed  up  of  life,  and  corruption  clothed  upon  with 
incorruption,  we  walk  by  faith.  Let  not,  therefore,  what  God  hath  revealed 
as  the  object  of  our  belief  be,  when  unintelligible  to  us,  pronounced  a 
corruption  or  gross  nonsense,  for  this  were  presumptuous  and  highly 
unbecoming  such  ignorant  creatures  as  we,  in  our  best  state,  arc. 

It  may  be  asked,  secondly,  what  reason  is  there  for  preferring  the  MSS. 
which,  of  late,  have  made  their  appearance  in  the  world,  to  those  ones  which 
the  Church  hath  always  received  as  authentic,  and  which  we  are  told  the 
ancient  Chaldee  Paraphrasts  (by  many  Centuries  older  than  any  MS.  now 
produced)  have  exactly  followed  ?  No  reason  can  be  given  for  this  preference 
in  any  instance  where  they  disagree  ;  but  many  reasons  can  be  assigned  for 
their  being  of  infinitely  less  authority.  One  great  reason  for  this,  is  their 
exceeding  disagreement  with  one  another.  According  to  Kennicot's  own 
Account  of  them,  they  have  been  carelessly  and  negligently  Transcribed, 
and  are  full  of  very  material  mistakes,  arising  from  the  ignorance,  haste,  or 
inadvertency  of  the  Transcribers.  How  absolutely  unfit,  then,  to  be  put  in 
competition  with  those  Copies  which  the  whole  Church  was  intimately  con 
cerned  to  see  faithfully  Transcribed. 

Another  reason  for  their  being  reckoned  of  small  authority,  is  their 
uncertain  Dates,  and  the  suspicious  manner  in  which  most,  if  not  all,  of 
them  have  made  their  appearance  in  the  world.  In  settling  their  Dates, 
Dr.  Kennicot  makes  some  of  them  nine,  others  eight,  others  seven,  and 
others  six  hundred  years  old.  The  method  of  ascertaining  the  antiquity  of 
his  MSS.  being  somewhat  curious,  I  shall  give  it  in  his  own  words.  Of  the 
Hebrew  MS.  of  the  Pentateuch,  which  is  reckoned  the  most  ancient,  he 
says — « It  may,  perli«i>*,  be  a  moderate  xiijijio^ition  to  iniayine  it  writ  as  long 
before  the  time  it  was  presented  as  it  has  been  since,  which  will  set  the 
antiquity  of  it  at  about  nine  hundred  years."  If  this  is  the  Avay  we  are  to 
calculate  the  age  of  MSS.,  we  may  make  them  of  what  standing  we  please; 
for  we  need  only  call  them  very  ancient,  and  then  explain  what  we  mean  by 
very  ancient,  whether  five  hundred  or  fifteen  hundred  years.  But  I  presume 
every  cautious  Christian  will  require  some  farther  evidence  in  behalf  of  the 
antiquity  of  these  MSS.  than  that  of  a  "  perhaps,"  a  "  supposition,"  and  "  I 
imagine,"  before  he  admits  them  as  evidence  against  the  authenticated  Copies. 
Many  such  proofs  as  this  we  have  for  the  age  of  the  other  MSS.  which 
are  reckoned  most  ancient. 

Moreover,  the  circumstance  of  such  a  vast  number  of  MSS.  being  never 


3-12  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

lioanl  of  till  lately,  and  having  so  suddenly  made  their  appearance  after 
rewards  were  offered  for  them,  bears,  in  my  view,  a  very  suspicious  aspect 
Ihe  Jews,  from  their  rooted  aversion  to  Christianity,  and  desire  of  lucre 
(which  seems  to  lie  their  reigning  principle),  might  'have  been  induced  to 
make  these  corrupted  MSS.,  and  lodge  them  in  such  repositories  as  that 
they  could  not  escape  the  search  of  the  Manuscript  Collators.  They  would 
be  convinced  that  if  these  spurious  MSS.  were  admitted  as  evidence  against 
the  present  Printed  Copy,  this,  in  the  end,  must  effectually  invalidate  the 
genuine  Hebrew  Bible;  and  as  the  Christian  Edifice  rests  upon  the  Founda 
tion  of  the  Prophets,  as  well  as  Apostles  (Jesus  Christ  beino-  the  chief 
Corner  Stone),  if  this  part  of  the  Foundation  should  be  taken  away,  they 
would  indulge  the  hope  that  the  Edifice  must  tumble  down— an  event 
winch,  since  its  first  erection,  it  has  been  their  strenuous  endeavour  to 
bring  about. 

_  But  if  this  suspicion  against  the  lately  found  out  MSS.  should  be  deemed 
an  invidious  one,  yet  tin-  most  favourable  way  they  can  be  accounted  for  is, 
that  they  have  been  made  by  private  hands  for  their  own  private  amusement 
or  instruction^  Their  incorrectness,  therefore,  and  disagreement  with  the 
authentic  Copies,  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  Being  the  work  of  private 
persons,  the  Church  could  know  nothing  of  them,  or  at  least  was  no  way 
concerned  for  their  purity  and  correctness  ;  on  which  account  it  need  be  no 
surprise  that  these  Transcripts  should  abound  with  inaccuracies  and 
corruptions.  ^  The  only  matter  of  surprise  is  that,  among  Christians,  these 
corrupted  MSS.  should  be  admitted  as  evidence  against  "the  true  ones,  and 
their  authority  frequently  made  to  supersede  those  which  the  Church  of  God 
has  always  looked  upon  as  authentic,  and  has  guarded  with  the  utmost  care 
and  circumspection. 

As  to  the  Septuagint  Translation  and  Oriental  Versions,  their  only  use 
in  our  Biblical  researches  seems  to  be  to  help  us  to  come  at  the  meaning  of 
the  Text,  or,  at  least,  to  show  us  in  what  sense  the  Authors  of  them  under 
stood  it ;  for  whoever  will  compare  the  ScptuAgint  with  the  Original,  will 
soon  be  convinced  that  it  cannot  be  a  proper  means  of  correcting  the 
Hebrew  Text.  It  is  frequently  so  lax  as  scarcely  to  have  one  Greek°word 
answering  to  one  Hebrew  word.  Wherever  there  was  any  difficulty,  the 
Authors  did  not  give  it  a  verbal  Translation,  but  put  their  sense  of  the  place 
into  a  paraphrase,  by  which  we  find  how  they  understood  it,  but  nothing 
farther.  This  has  been  shown  by  an  induction  of  particulars  by  many  of 
the  learned,  particularly  the  Eey.  Dr.  Pocokc,  and  llobert  Spearman,  Esq., 
a  Layman  of  great  learning,  piety,  and  judgment.  There  arc,  besides,  in 
this  Translation,  many  known  deviations  from  the  Original,  which  many 
able  pens  have  been  employed  in  accounting  for,  and  which  have  been  in 
many  cases  attributed  to  the  fear  of  offending  Ptolemy  and  the  Egyptians. 
This  being  the  scheme  which  these  Translators  pursued,  and  these  the 
liberties  they  took,  they  cannot  be  brought  as  evidence  for  any  reading, 
which  no  Translation  that  is  not  verbally  literal  can  be  said  to  have 
preserved. 

What  has  been  said  of  the  Septuagint  may,  in  part,  be  applied  to  the 
Oriental  Versions,  which,  by  the  consent  of  "all,  even  Kennicot  himself, 
frequently  give  us  not  a  literal,  but  a  paraphrastic  rendering  :  therefore 
they  cannot  be  affirmed  to  have  preserved  a  reading,  which  we  are  to  admit 
in  preference  to  the  Original  Text. 


PATRICK  TORRY.  843 

The  last  thing  I  shall  take  notice  of  is  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch, 
which,  th 6  I  cannot  read  in  its  Original  Characters,  yet  I  know  as  much  of 
the  History  of  it,  and  of  those  who  used  it,  as  gives  me  solid  ground  of 
objection  against  the  prerogative  that  some  would  invest  it  with,  of  being  a 
Correctorium  of  our  Hebrew  Bibles.  The  Samaritans  were  a  people  in 
perpetual  enmity  with  the  Church  of  God,  consisting  of  Idolaters  of 
various  Nations,  with  some  fugitive  and  Apostate  Jews,  and  were  ignorant 
and  wicked  to  the  last  degree.  The  learned  Dr.  Prideaux  gives  this  Account 
of  them — '-'And  then  to  prevent  the  Land  from  becoming  desolate,  he 
brought  others  from  Babylon,  and  Cutha,  and  Avah,  and  Hamath,  and 
Sepharvaim,  to  dwell  in  the  Cities  of  Samaria  in  their  stead."  And  again 
he  says — "  Samaria  thenceforth  became  the  common  asylum  of  refractory 
Jews  ;  and  after  some  time  the  greatest  part  of  that  people  were  made  up  of 
Apostate  Jews  and  their  descendants,  so  that  the  Samaritans  became  a 
mongrel  sort  of  people,  made  up  of  such  of  the  Eastern  Nations  as 
Esarhaddoii  had  brought  there,  and  Apostate  Jews.''  This  is  the  known 
and  acknowledged  state  of  the  people  of  Samaria.  Can  we,  then,  apply  to 
such  a  race  of  wretches  for  a  more  authentic  Copy  of  the  Law  than  is  to  be 
found  among  them  whose  greatest  glory  was  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  who 
reverenced  them  in  an  unparalleled  manner '?  Shall  we  receive  from  the 
worst  of  Schismatics  a  Copy  of  the  Law  as  authentic,  without  knowing  in  the 
least  the  care  or  fidelity  with  Avhicli  it  was  Transcribed,  and  when  we  have 
no  further  Account  of  it  than  that  it  was  picked  up  in  the  East  in  the  Six 
teenth  or  Seventeenth  Century,  and  dispersed  in  Europe  without  any  thing 
to  establish  it,  or  wipe  off  the  aspersions  which  the  character  of  the  people 
from  whom  it  was  taken  must  unavoidably  throw  upon  it  ? 

Thus  much  upon  the  modern  plan  of  correcting  the  Original  Hebrew 
Scriptures,  and  the  greatly  extolled  help  in  that  business.  Upon  the  whole, 
we  see  that  the  plan  is  a  dangerous  one.  which,  if  generally  carried  into 
execution,  would  render  the  Oracles  of  God  corrupted  indeed'!  The  Bible 
would  then  cease  to  be  what  it  is — a  Scheme  graciously  revealed  from 
Heaven  for  the  comfort  and  benefit  of  man — but  would  dwindle  away  into  a 
mere  human  composition.  Upon  a  review  of  the  various  sources  of 
emendation,  and  examining  their  sufficiency  for  that  purpose,  they  appear  to 
me  altogether  incompetent.  The  Oriental  Versions  frequently  give  us  not 
a  literal,  but  a  paraphrastic  rendering,  which  shews  us  in  what  sense  their 
Authors  understood  the  Original,  but  iio.thing  farther.  The  same  may  be 
said  of  the  Septuagint  Translation,  which,  moreover,  abounds  with  many 
known  deviations  from  the  Hebrew,  owing,  as  I  hinted  above,  to  a  fear  of 
offending  Ptolemy  and  the  Egyptians.  As  to  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch, 
enough  is  known  of  the  History  of  the  Samaritans  themselves  to  dis 
countenance  their  Copy  of  the  Law  from  any  pretensions  to  authenticity  or 
integrity.  And,  lastly,  in  regard  to  the  MSS.  which  have  lately  made  their 
appearance  in  the  world,  as  they  seem  at  best  to  have  been  the  work  of 
private  hands  for  their  own  instruction  or  amusement ;  and  as,  consequently, 
the  Church  was  no  way  concerned  for  their  purity,  therefore  they  must  be 
of  very  little  authority,  and  their  deviation  from  the  authentic  Copies 
deserve  no  regard. 

For  all  that  hath  been  said,  then,  or  ever  can  be  said  or  done,  the 
"Word  of  God,"  as  its  Author  hath  declared,  "  standeth  sure.'"  Like  that 
unchangeable  Being  by  whom  it  was  indited,  "  it  remaineth  the  same 


844  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."     "One  iota  or  tittle  of  it  shall  not  pass 
away  till  all  be  fulfilled." 

To  account  for  the  human  means  by  which,  under  the  superintending 
Providence  of  God,  its  integrity  and  purity  have  been  preserved,  is  no  diffi 
cult  matter.  The  care  and  circumspection  of  that  unhappy  people,  the 
Jews,  in  regard  to  the  purity  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  is  highly  remarkable. 
Bishop  Walton  snys — "  Imo  tanta  superstitione  fcrnutur  Judei  crga  sacros 
codices,  ut  in  libro  legis  si  unum  erratum  dcprehendant,  pro  illegitimo 
damnant  ct  abjiciunt."  "  So  superstitious  are  the  Jews  with  regard  to  their 
Sacred  Code,  that  if  they  find  one  error  in  their  Book  of  the  Law,  they  con 
demn  it  as  spurious,  and  reject  it." 

But,  not  to  insist  on  this,  it  will  not  be  denied,  I  hope,  by  any  one  who 
believes  the  Divine  Inspiration  of  the  Apostles,  that  they  would  he  possessed 
of  pure  and  authentic  Copies  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  These  they  would 
bring  into  the  Church  with  them,  and  make  use  of  in  their  many  disputations 
with  their  unbelieving  countrymen.  At  least  this  must  he  admitted  as  to 
the  more  learned  of  those  who  were  inspired  in  the  Apostolic  Age,  such  as 
S.  Paul  (the  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles),  the  rich  Barnabas,  the  eloquent 
Apollos,  and  the  Evangelist  S.  Luke  ;  and,  no  doubt,  there  were  many  others 
of  whom  the  same  may  very  fairly  be  presumed.  By  these  means,  and 
through  such  hands,  the  Bible  would  find  its  way  among  Christians  in  the 
first  and  brightest  period  of  Christianity,  and,  from  the  zeal  and  fervour  of 
those  times,  would  spread  and  be  multiplied  in  great  abundance ;  and  these 
old  Copies,  and  Transcripts  from  them,  would  be  traditionally  handed  down 
through  such  as  Origen  and  Jerom  to  the  era  of  Printing — handed  down 
with  the  utmost  care  and  circumspection,  as  the  whole  Church  of  God  was 
nearly  concerned  for  the  purity  and  integrity  of  this  inestimable  treasure 
committed  to  its  Trust. 

In  this  belief  and  conviction,  I  rest  myself  abundantly  satisfied;  and  I 
have  great  reason,  with  every  fellow-Christian,  to  be  thankful  to  God  that 
He  hath  preserved  His  Holy  Oracles  pure  and  entire,  to  be  a  perfect  Rule  of 
Faith,  as  well  as  of  moral  conduct.  Yea,  let  us  be  thankful  that  our  minds 
are  not  perplexed  with  doubts  and  scruples  abotit  the  integrity  of  this  Sacred 
Book— scruples  which  at  last  must  terminate  either  in  a  total  disregard  of 
it,  or  in  sending  us  in  search  of  another  Rule  of  Faith  and  Conduct  where 
it  will  be  sought  for  in  vain. 

Remarks  on  tlie  Specimens,  d'c. 

Chapter  I.,  Terse  1st. — "In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth."  This  is  exactly  the  same  with  our  own  Translation.  In  a 
Note  on  this  Verse,  Dr.  G.  says,  "The  Hebrew  word  translated  God,  and 
pronounced  ]\l<>li.i»i.  means  the  "  Great,"  the  "  Mighty  One."  . 

Why  Dr.  G.  should  labour  to  obscure  the  meaning  of  QTl  /K>  Elolim, 
which  is  a  relative  term  for  the  Deity,  and  full  of  comfort  to  the  sinner,  by 
translating  it  the  "  Great,"  the  "  Mighty  One,"  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  the 
best  Lexicographers,  I  know  not.  Great  and  3/7///if// are  terms,  when  applied 
to  the  Deity,  which  represent  Him  in  his  absolute  capacity,  and  hold  forth 
none  of  that  comfort  and  consolation,  display  none  of  that  unspeakable 
mercy  and  grace,  which  are  couched  under  the  name  Elohhu.  The  only 
word  in  the  Original  HebreAV  denoting  the  absolute  and  necessary  existence 


PATKICK  TOEEY.  845 

of  the  Deity  is  nifp,  Jelun-fih, '•'•'-  which  signifies  the  self-existent  Being.  All 
the  other  names  by  which  He  hath  been  pleased  to  reveal  Himself  to  man 
kind,  point  Him  out  in  a  relative  capacity,  or  indicate  that  gracious  relation 
which  He  bears  to  His  creatures,  especially  the  children  of  men.  Of  these, 
Elohim  is  one.  It  means  Fii'ihratores  jure — i.e.,  "  Covenanters  upon  oath"  f 
— and  is  a  term  assumed  by  the  Persons  in  Jehovah,  by  which  they  represent 
themselves  as  under  a  Covenant,  made  by  oath,  to  perform  certain  con 
ditions  for  the  benefit  and  happiness  of  man. 

Dr.  Hodges,  Provost  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford,  in  his  Treatise  called  the 
"Christian  Plan,"  has  evinced  that  this  Covenant,  which  S.  Paul  says  was 
made  before  all  worlds,  consisted  of  two  parts — one  relative  to  man  in  his 
estate  of  innocence  ;  another  provisional,  determining  what  the  Elohim 
would  do  farther  for  man,  in  case  he  should  forfeit  his  first  estate  by  an  act 
of  disobedience.  AYheu  this  latter  should  happen  to  be  the  case,  they 
covenanted  to  restore  man  to  his  first  estate  by  such  ways  as  would  display 
the  infinite  wisdom,  justice,  and  mercy  of  the  Divine  Being.  That  there  was 
such  a  Covenant,  has  been  the  constant  Doctrine  of  the  Christian  Church; 
and  this  is  the  substance  of  the  Doctrine,  as  deduced  from  the  scattered 
Passages  in  Scripture  which  relate  to  it :— By  virtue  of  this  Covenant, 
Christ,  as  to  His  humanity,  was  enabled  to  overcome  the  Devil  and  all  the 
enemies  of  man,  and  to  perfect  our  Redemption ;  and  from  this  Covenant  it 
was  that  the  ever-blessed  Three  in  One  were  pleased  to  take  that  glorious 
but  fearful  name  DTV^X  mm,  i.e.,  ,J<>lnn-tih  F.lohhn  ;  ijloi-inux,  inasmuch  as 
the  transaction  to  which  it  refers  displays  in  the  most  glorious  manner  the 
mercy  and  goodness  of  God;  and  J'r<irf'itl,  inasmuch  as  by  one  part  of  the 
Covenant,  eternal  and  infinite  power  is  engaged  to  make  the  enemies  of 
Christ  his  footstool.  (See  Psalm  ex.  1  — all  which  treats  of  this  Original 
Covenant.) 

The  term  Elohim,  then,  as  applied  to  Jehovah,  being  founded  upon  that 
gracious  transaction  just  now  mentioned,  represents  the  Deity  in  the  most 
delightful  relation  to  us,  namely,  as  Creator,  Redeemer,  and  Sanctifier  of 
the  human  race.  To  pervert  this  meaning  of  the  word,  therefore,  which  it 
evidently  bears,  is  obscuring  a  truth  which  it  is  the  sole  purpose  of  Revela 
tion  to  unfold  and  manifest  to  the  children  of  men.  And,  moreover,  to 
make  Moses  borrow  this  term  from  the  Heathens  is  not  only  forgetting  that 
he  wrote  by  Inspiration  of  God,  but  is  also,  to  use  Dr.  G.'s  own  phrase,  "  a 
pitiful  and  God-degrading  idea."  Instead  of  Moses  borrowing  it  from  the 
Idolaters  of  those  days,  they  had  certainly  borrowed  it  from  the  Worshippers 
of  the  true  God.  These  Idolaters  applied  it  to  the  material  heavens,  and 
accordingly  expected  from  them  protection,  victory,  and  happiness.  Hence 
this  glorious  title  is  frequently  claimed  for  Jehovah  in  exclusion  of  those  Idols. 

In  another  Note  on  Verse  1st,  Dr.  G.  says, — "  Whoever  reads  this 
simple  but  sublime  Narrative  with  due  attention,  and  devoid  of  theological 
prepossessions,  will  most  probably  agree  with  Winston,  that  the  Historian 
confines  himself  to  the  creation,  or  perhaps  embellishment,  of  this  terraqueous 
globe,  and  only  mentions  such  other  parts  of  the  universe  as  became 

*  I  see  no  barbarity  in  the  pronunciation  of  Jehovah,  and  think  it  is  a  pity  it 
should  ever  have  been  rendered  Lord,  as  that  word  does  not  fully  point  out  the 
meaning  of  the  Original. 

f  So  the  Hebrew  Lexicographers,  rarkhurst  and  Bate,  have  proved. 
VOL.  n.  2  x 


346  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

eventually  relative  to  it."  But  how  can  any  one  think  that  Moses  confines 
himself  to  the  creation  of  this  terraqueous  globe,  when  he  expressly  says, 
"In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,"  hereby  joining 
the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  together ;  and  when,  afterwards, 
he  makes  mention  of  the  creation  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  Indeed,  Dr. 
G.  says,  "  It  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  suppose  that  these  luminaries 
were  now  first  created :  the  Text  does  not  say  so."  But  I  affirm  the  Text 
does  say  so.  The  original  word  here  for  "  to  make"  is  \w\,  which,  through 
the  whole  Bible,  never  signifies  to  "render  visible,"  the  sense  he  would  put 
upon  it.  If  this  Divine  Narrative  of  the  creation  of  the  System  of  Nature 
is  only  to  be  admitted  thus  partially,  words  must  cease  to  have  a  determinate 
meaning ;  and,  by  a  similar  conduct  in  other  cases,  we  may  make  of  the 
Bible  what  we  please. 

In  the  same  Note  the  Dr.  says — "  Our  little  planet,  then,  was  originally, 
according  to  the  Hebrew  cosmogony,  a  chaotic  mass  of  earth,  water,  and 
dense  tempestuous  air,  decompounded  and  brought  to  perfection  in  the 
space  of  six  days,  for  reasons  best  known  to  the  wise  Architect,  which  it  is 
as  useless  as  it  is  vain  for  us  to  attempt  to  investigate."  That  the  great 
Creator  had  many  good  and  wise  reasons  for  taking  the  space  of  six  days  in 
creating  this  material  system,  which  we  cannot  know  in  our  present 
condition,  must  be  readily  admitted  ;  but  that  He  had  also  other  reasons 
which  it  docs  concern  us  to  know,  ought  not  to  be  denied.  It  appears, 
then,  that  He  proceeded  in  this  manner  to  exhibit,  as  in  a  picture,  that  wise 
scheme  of  duty  by  Avhich  man  was  to  be  allowed  to  employ  himself  in  the 
necessary  affairs  of  life  for  six  days  following,  but  no  longer.  And  as  God 
rested,  or  ceased  from  His  work,  on  the  seventh  day,  thereby  sanctifying 
it  and  making  it  holy  to  Himself,  and  separating  it  for  His  immediate 
service  ;  so  on  that  day,  man  was  not  only  to  cease  from  the  ordinary  labours 
and  employments  of  this  world,  but  was  also  to  exercise  himself  in  the 
more  solemn  duties  of  religion,  as  a  means  of  preparing  himself  for  that 
eternal  //<*/,  which  the  Apostle  says  remaiucth  for  the  people  of  God.  The 
Creator's  working  six  days,  then,  seems  to  have  been  in  order  to  the 
sanctification  of  the  seventh,  and  the  sanctiiication  of  the  seventh  appears 
to  have  had  a  double  view.  As  it  looked  backward,  it  directed  man  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  way  and  manner  in  which  the  great  work  of  creation  was 
performed  and  completed.  As  it  looked  forward,  it  had  respect  to  the  end 
of  time,  the  dissolution  of  the  world,  and  the  eternal  state  of  rest  that  shall 
then  succeed.  From  this,  I  think,  it  may  fairly  be  inferred  that,  to 
investigate  the  reasons  of  the  Divine  procedure  in  this  matter,  is  neither 
useless  nor  vain  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  will  always  afford  us  much  delightful 
instruction. 

Verse  2nd. — "  The  earth  was  a  desolate  waste."  Here  Dr.  G.  leaves 
out  entirely  the  conjunction  j,  evidently  with  a  view  to  render  plausible  his 
translation  of  the  two  following  words,  viz.,  1H31  inn,  ten  itlcn.  Why 
he  translates  them  "  a  desolate  waste,"  unless  to  make  them  favour  his  idea 
that  the  earth  existed  for  <i<je*  of  <t<jex  before  Moses'  Account  of  it,  seems 
unaccountable.  According  to  my  great  Lexicographer,  Mr.  Parkhurst,  these 
words  signify  "  unformed  and  hollow,"  which  agrees  with  our  common 
translation,  "-without  form  and  void;"  and  this  meaning  he  supports  from 
many  other  Texts  of  Scripture  where  the  words  occur.  The  unscriptural 
notion  of  the  earth's  existence  before  the  Account  given  of  it  by  the  Jewish 


PATRICK  TOEEY.  347 

Legislator,  is,  in  my  opinion,  entirely  overturned  by  the  first  Verse  of  the 
Bible,  which,  when  literally  rendered,  is,  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the 
substance  of  the  heavens,  and  the  substance  of  the  earth."  Dr.  G.  indeed 
endeavours  to  evade  this  rendering  by  fixing  the  meaning  of  &O3,  bera,  to 
"fashioning  or  reforming."  But  fashioning  or  reforming  cannot  be  the 
meaning  of  N"G  here,  because  it  follows  in  the  2nd  Verse,  "  and  the  earth 
was  without  form."  So  that  in  this  place  K"O  denotes  absolute  creation 
or  production  into  being.  In  like  manner,  in  Verse  27th,  where  it  is  said, 
"  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,"  N~O  refers  to  the  creation  of  the 
soul,  as  well  as  formation  of  the  body :  therefore  the  word  must  here  also 
denote  absolute  creation,  unless  it  be  supposed  that  our  souls  existed  for 
fif/t's  of  a;/es  before  Adam's  creation,  and  that  our  bodies  are  prisons  prepared 
for  them  by  way  of  punishment  for  their  former  misbehaviour — a  conceit 
foolishly  maintained  by  some,  but  pretty  much  akin  to  this  favourite  fancy 
of  Dr.  G. 

Yet  he  thinks  it  a  God-degrading  idea  to  suppose  that  no  worlds  existed 
above  six  thousand  years  ago.  But  why '?  Does  that  supposition  derogate 
anything  from  God's  glory  ?  By  no  means.  God  is  infinitely  glorious  in 
Himself  from  all  eternity.  He  cannot  receive  any  additional  glory  even 
from  the  works  of  His  own  hands,  nor  can  His  glory  be  diminished  should 
they  all  cease  to  exist.  His  works  declare  or  show  forth  His  glory  ;  and  for 
His  pleasure,  as  the  Psalmist  says,  they  were  created.  But  nothing  can 
make  Him  more  glorious  than  He  is  of  Himself;  and  had  the  System  of 
Nature  never  been  in  existence,  He  could  have  been  no  less  glorious.  We 
must,  therefore,  retort  Dr.  G.'s  accusation  upon  himself,  and  say  that,  to 
insist  on  the  existence  of  worlds  before  Eevelation  gives  any  Account  of 
them,  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  a  more  rational  or  religious  sentiment,  is 
founded  upon  a  wrong  conception  of  the  Deity,  as  it  implies  that  He  can 
receive  additional  glory  from  His  works ;  and  hence  it  is  a  God-degrading 
idea  indeed !  

In  1787,  Mr.  Torry  was  Married  to  Christian,  daughter  of 
Bishop  Kilgour,  whom  he  had  the  grief  of  losing  two  years  after, 
and  by  whom  he  had  no  issue. 

Bishop  Kilgour  required  an  Assistant  for  his  Charge  at 
Peterhead,  and  to  that  Office  in  1789  he  called  Mr.  Torry,  then 
in  the  27th  year  of  his  age.  Two  years  afterwards  the  ex-Primus 
Died,  and  his  Assistant  became  his  Successor. 

Peterhead  was  one  of  the  few  places  where,  under  the  in 
fluence  of  a  powerful  Patron,  the  Episcopal  Incumbent  retained 
his  Benefice  till  1715.  The  Church  was  erected  at  an  expense 
of  <£320,  and  was  called  S.  Peter's  Chapel.  This  was  its  fate, 
as  recorded  in  the  Minute  Book  :— 

"  1746.  May  16. — '  To  cash  paid  tradesmen,  &c.,  for  pulling  down  our 
Chapel  (the  Managers  being  forced  thereto  by  Lord  Ancrum),  in  order  to 
save  its  being  sett  on  fire,  which  would  endanger  the  town  being  burnt ;'  to 


348  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

which  the  following  Note  is  appended  :— <  The  Cliappell  of  Peterhead  was 
destroyed  the  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  days  of  May,  1740,  and  the 
Managers  were  obliged  to  employ  workmen  and  pay  them,  in  order  to 
prevent  its  being  sett  on  fire,  which  would  endanger  burning  the  town.  It 
was  done  by  Lord  Ancruni  (Lieutenant-Colonel  of  Lord  Mark  Kerr's 
Dragoons),  who  was  at  the  entering  of  the  people  to  work.'  " 

Here  Bishop  Kilgour  settled,  as  Bishop  Dunbar  had  done 
before  him;  and,  thirty  years  ago,  individuals  were  alive  who 
could  recollect  his  performing  Divine  Service  twelve  or  fourteen 
times  on  the  Sunday  at  different  houses,  where  as  many  attended 
as  could  join  in  the  Service  without  being  seen  by  the  Priest,  or 
could  collect  without  attracting  the  notice  of  the  Military. 

In  a  few  years,  however,  this  severity  was  so  far  relaxed  as 
to  enable  the  Clergyman  to  receive  the  Congregation  in  his  own 
house;  but  it  was  not  till  the  Accession  of  King  George  III., 
that  they  could  again  venture  on  erecting  a  Building  avowedly 
for  a  Church. 

However,  even  after  this  period,  when  on  a  Vacancy  at 
Lonmay,  Bishop  Kilgour  had,  in  accordance  with  his  own  sense 
of  duty,  and  with  the  principles  of  the  great  body  of  the  Lonmay 
Congregation,  Instituted  a  Nonj  tiring  Incumbent,  the  consequence 
was  the  shutting  up,  by  the  Sheriff,  the  Churches  both  of  Lon 
may  and  Peterhead.  This  Interdict,  indeed,  so  far  as  regarded 
the  Peterhead  Church  was  not  of  long  continuance ;  but  in  the 
meantime  a  misunderstanding  had  unfortunately  arisen  between 
the  Proprietors  of  the  Church  and  Bishop  Kilgour,  respecting  its 
management.  It  ended  in  the  Proprietors,  who  were  bound  for 
a  debt  of  £250,  withdrawing  themselves,  and  a  small  minority  of 
the  Congregation,  from  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Bishop, 
and  inviting  Dr.  William  Laing,  a  Clergyman  "  qualified  accord 
ing  to  Law,"  to  be  their  Pastor  in  the  Church,  while  Bishop 
Kilgour,  for  the  large  majority  who  adhered  to  him,  built  a  Place 
of  Worship  in  a  Court  on  the  South  side  of  Broad  Street. 

In  this  place  Mr.  Tony's  lot  was  thrown,  and  it  had  its  con 
veniences.  Only  30  miles  from  Aberdeen,  and  with  the  easiest 
water  communication,  it  gave  him  ready  access  to  this  Metro 
polis ;  not  more  than  half  that  distance  from  Fraserburgh,  it 
allowed  him  to  interchange  many  a  visit  with  Alexander  Jolly. 


PATRICK  TORRY.  349 

In  September,  1791,  Mr.  Tony  Married  Jane,  daughter  of 
Dr.  William  Young,  of  Fawsyde,  Kincardineshire,  by  his  wife 
Ann,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Thomas  Gordon,  Esq.  of  Buthlaw, 
in  the  County  of  Aberdeen,  and  had  by  this  Marriage  three  sons 
and  four  daughters,  viz., — John,  Dean  of  St.  Andrews,  &c.; 
Thomas,  late  Incumbent  of  S.  Paul's  Church,  Dundee ;  Mary 
Anne,  wife  of  Captain  Sims,  R.N. ;  and  Christian,  unmarried,  who 
continued  to  live  with  her  father  till  his  Death.  At  Peterhead 
he  was  not  only  earnest  in  the  discharge  of  his  other  Pastoral 
duties,  but  also  became  very  acceptable  as  a  Preacher,  to  which 
a  fine  voice,  a  clear  and  forcible  style,  and  a  pleasing  manner 
greatly  contributed  :  and  so  successfully  did  he  pursue  his  calling, 
that  in  less  than  three  years  after  his  appointment  to  the  Charge, 
the  Church  in  which  he  officiated  becoming  too  small  for  his 
increasing  Flock,  a  new  one  was  built  capable  of  holding  500 
persons,  the  expense  of  which  was  upwards  of  ,£800. 

Towards  the  end  of  1802,  a  proposal  was  made  by  Dr.  Laing 
of  Peterhead,  to  submit  to  his  Diocesan.  This  Priest  had  been 
schismatically  Ordained  about  1770,  by  Dr.  Trail,  then  Bishop 
of  Down  and  Connor,  while  on  a  tour  through  Scotland,  at 
Peterhead ;  though  Bishop  Kilgour  was  actually  resident  in  that 
Town  at  the  time. 

While  Mr.  Tony  gave  much  of  his  time  to  Pastoral  duty 
and  Professional  studies,  he  devoted  many  of  his  spare  hours  to 
the  cultivation  of  the  Fine  Arts,  Music,  Poetry,  and  Painting. 
In  the  latter  two  he  did  not  attain  much  proficiency,  though 
various  creditable  specimens  of  both  remain ;  but  in  Music  he 
was  more  successful.  Naturally  of  a  scientific  turn  of  mind,  he 
completely  mastered  the  Theory  of  Music,  and  even  went  the 
length  of  propounding  some  original  ideas  on  the  Chromatic 
Scale.  He  also  attained  some  skill  in  playing  several  Instru 
ments,  especially  the  Organ.  He  had  several  Organs  built  in 
Peterhead,  doing  with  his  own  hand  the  most  delicate  parts  of  the 
work  ;  and  one  of  them,  formerly  in  his  own  drawing  room,  was 
first  used  in  the  Church  at  Elgin,  and  afterwards  in  that  of 
Forgue.  Much  of  his  Correspondence,  especially  with  Primus 
John  Skinner  and  Bishop  Macfarlane,  turns  on  this  subject. 


350  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDEEWS. 

To  the  Pu'c.  3Ir.  Jones,  Rector  of  Pastnn,  Northamptonshire. 

Rev.  Sir, — By  the  favour  of  my  Ordinary,  Bishop  Skinner,  I  am  en 
couraged  to  address  you  on  a  subject  which  has  much  engaged  my  attention 
for  several  years  past ;  and  I  hope  you  will  excuse  this  trouble  from  one 
who  has  long  been  an  admirer  of  your  character,  both  as  a  Divine  and 
Philosopher,  and  who  is  happy  in  having  this  opportunity  afforded  him  of 
expressing  his  gratitude  for  the  instruction  and  pleasure  he  is  constantly 
deriving  from  your  labours  both  in  Philosophy  and  Theology.  I  can  safely 
say  that  some  one  or  other  of  your  Works  is  almost  my  daily  companion ; 
and  had  it  not  been  for  your  Physiological  Disquisitions,  I  should  probably 
never  have  had  the  happiness  I  enjoy  at  this  moment  of  addressing  you. 
From  that  excellent  Work,  where  Music  is  discussed  as  a  branch  of  Natural 
Philosophy,  I  have  chiefly  derived  the  knowledge  I  possess  of  the  grounds 
and  principles  of  harmony ;  which,  combined  with  a  natural  mechanical 
genius,  put  me  upon  an  <'.r/«>riin<'i/i<il  attempt  to  rectify  the  Musical  Scale  on 
the  Organ,  the  result  of  which  I  am  now  to  communicate  to  you. 

It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  AVC  can  only  have  one  perfect  key  on 
the  Organ  or  Harpsichord,  with  the  harmonic  intervals  just,  and  the  due 
order  of  the  tones,  major  and  minor;  and  that  in  order  to  make  more  keys 
such  as  the  ear  will  be  satisfied  with,  we  must  sacrifice  the  perfection  of  our 
standard  key,  and  have  recourse  to  a  system  of  mean  tones,  by  lowering  the 
5tlH  a  quarter  of  a  comma  each,  which  enlarges  the  4ths,  and  reduces  the 
minor  thirds,  but  keeps  the  major  thirds  to  their  true  measure.  But  this 
system,  altho  perhaps  the  best  hitherto  devised,  leaves  13  of  the  24  keys  in 
such  a  state  of  imperfection  as  the  ear  can  scarcely  tolerate,  and  completely 
destroys  the  most  striking  beauties  of  some  of  Handel's  finest  Compositions 
on  the  major  key  of  E,  and  even  that  of  D  when  he  modulates  into  the 
related  keys.  Likewise  Pergolesi's  celebrated  "  Stabat  Mater"  is  by  this 
system  greatly  deprived  of  its  power  of  producing  the  intended  effect ;  for  I 
am  persuaded  that  in  Pergolesi's  time,  keyed  instruments  were  tuned  by  a 
series  of  perfect  5'hs,  wThich  renders  the  intervals  in  that  Composition  very 
good.  Any  person  may  be  practically  convinced  of  this  by  first  playing  over 
the  Piece  on  a  Harpsichord  tempered  in  the  usual  manner,  and  then  retim 
ing  the  Instrument  by  a  series  of  perfect  5ths,  and  playing  it  over  a  second 
time,  from  which  he  will  be  made  to  feel  how  much  more  wonderfully  strik 
ing,  and  even  heart-rending,  it  is.  The  truth  is,  that  the  ear  will  never  be 
satisfied  with  false  harmony,  where,  from  the  nature  of  the  interval,  it  is 
entitled  to  expect  a  just  relation  and  sweetness  of  sound.  But  as  this 
cannot  be  obtained  but  on  a  small  number  of  keys,  on  the  Organ  as  com 
monly  constructed,  I  think  it  wrould  be  accounted  an  acquisition  to  the 
Musical  Art,  if  any  one  should  furnish  an  instrument  that  a  performer  could 
play  on  with  equal  satisfaction  on  all  the  24  keys. 

Having  a  Chamber  Organ,  and  being  strangely  impressed  with  this 
idea,  I  began,  about  four  years  ago,  to  revolve  in  my  mind,  how  it  might  be 
carried  into  effect.  I  communicated  my  design  to  such  of  my  musical 
friends  as  are  acquainted  with  the  Principles  of  Harmony,  who  all  treated  it 
as  romantic  and  visionary  in  the  extreme.  Not  discouraged,  but  rather 
stimulated,  by  this  opposition,  I  employed  such  intervals  of  time  as  the  more 
immediate  duties  of  my  Profession  allowed  me,  in  putting  my  scheme  into 
execution  ;  and  you  may  believe  I  have  no  small  satisfaction  in  being  now 
able  to  declare  that  I  have  succeeded  even  to  the  utmost  extent  of  my  own 


PATEICK  TORRY.  351 

sanguine  expectation.  A  performer  may  play  on  my  Organ  with  equal 
satisfaction  on  any  key  which  the  system  of  the  Octave  affords,  without  the 
least  perplexity  to  himself;  for  there  is  no  division  of  the  flats  and  sharps, 
with  different  pipes,  to  express  the  different  capacities  in  which  they  are 
often  used.  All  that  he  has  to  attend  to,  is  previously  to  put  his  left  foot 
on  one  or  other  of  two  Pedals,  according  to  a  written  direction  on  the  front 
of  the  Organ,  by  which  all  the  false  intervals  in  the  extreme  keys  are  im 
mediately  corrected,  and  rendered  perfectly  harmonious. 

I  must  now  request  that  you  will  not  only  forgive  this  freedom  and 
trouble,  but  even  favour  me  with  your  opinion  of  the  improvement  which  I 
have  now  been  communicating  to  you.  If  it  meets  with  your  approbation, 
perhaps  you  may  point  out  the  means  by  which  it  might  be  brought  into 
public  notice,  and  submitted  to  the  examination  of  some  of  the  best  practical 
Musicians  in  London. 

Before  I  conclude,  allow  me  to  thank  you  again  for  the  valuable  infor 
mation  and  singular  pleasure  I  have  derived  from  your  Literary  labours, 
which  I  have  now  been  conversant  with  for  nearly  nineteen  years.  And 
permit  me  to  assure  you  that  I  consider  myself,  in  common  with  the  Bishops 
and  the  rest  of  the  Clergy  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  as  under  the  greatest 
obligation  to  you,  for  the  honourable  testimony  you  have  borne  to  it  in  your 
Life  of  the  much-revered  and  eminently  learned  and  pious  Bishop  Home. 
For  this,  and  the  many  other  valuable  services  you  have  rendered  to  the 
cause  of  Christianity,  I  trust  that  God  will  remember  you  concerning  these 
things,  and  spare  you,  according  to  the  greatness  of  His  mercy,  in  that  Day 
when  an  awful  distinction  shall  be  made  between  those  who  have  faithfully 
served  and  those  who  cither  have  openly  opposed  or  secretly  betrayed  His 
cause.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  utmost  sincerity  and  esteem, 

Rev.  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  humble  Servant, 
Peterhead,  March  29,  1799.  PAT.  TORRY. 

Mr.  Tony  had  been  requested  by  the  Editor  to  write  an 
Article  in  "  Adam's  Religious  World  Displayed."  The  Bishop 
frequently  mentioned  that  the  Editor  had  used,  without  acknow 
ledging,  his  assistance. 

Mr.  Tony  was  in  1807  invested  with  the  Office  of  Treasurer 
to  the  Scotch  Episcopal  Friendly  Society,  and  much  of  his 
Correspondence  was  taken  tip  with  applications  to  its  liberality. 

Bishop  Watson  of  Dunkeld,  in  the  summer  of  this  year,  sank 
from  a  complication  of  diseases,  at  the  early  age  of  47.  He  was 
a  good,  if  not  a  great  man,  and  had  been  presented  to  the  Church 
of  Laurencekirk  by  Lord  Gardenston,  who,  though  a  Presby 
terian,  not  only  built  but  endowed  it  for  him  with  .£40  yearly, 
and  40  Bolls  of  Oatmeal. 

The  Primus  having  issued  his  Mandate  for  the  Election  of  a 


352  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Bishop  of  Dunkcld,  the  Clergy  met  at  Alyth,  on  September  14, 
1808,  and  Messrs.  Gleig  and  Tony  being  proposed,  the  former 
was  Elected  by  a  majority  of  one.  He  had  been  Elected  before 
in  1786,  but  was  opposed  by  Primus  John  Skinner ;  and  his  son 
John,  at  Forfar,  opposed  his  second  Election.  So  he  declined. 
Mr.  Tony  was  then  chosen  unanimously  by  John  Buchan,  John 
Skinner,  and  David  Moir.  John  Buchan  was  Proxy  for  John 
Robertson.  He  was  Consecrated  in  S.  Andrew's,  Long-acre, 
Aberdeen,  12th  October,  1808,  by  Bishops  Skinner,  Macfaiiane, 
and  Jolly. 

Before  Bishop  Tony's  Consecration,  the  great  age  and 
mental  imbecility  of  Bishop  Strachan  of  Brechin,  rendered  a 
Coadjutor  necessary.  Dr.  Gleig  was  now  unanimously  chosen, 
and  the  College  Confirmed  him  without  difficulty.  Only  18  days 
after  his  own  elevation  to  the  Episcopate,  Bishop  Tony  had  the 
satisfaction  of  assisting  at  that  of  his  friend,  on  the  Festival  of 
SS.  Simon  and  Jude,  at  Stonehaven. 

At  the  Episcopal  Synod  of  1809,  the  question  of  a  General 
Synod  of  the  Scotch  Church  was  mooted,  and  the  Charge  of 
Bishop  Gleig  in  the  next  year  rendered  it  still  more  necessary. 
He  alluded  to  a  habit  of  the  Primus  of  not  adhering  to  the  exact 
words  of  the  Liturgy,  and  a  somewhat  angry  Correspondence 
ensued.  The  Bishops  began  to  give  their  attention  to  the 
preparation  of  the  Canons  then  to  be  enacted. 

The  Synod  met  at  Aberdeen  on  the  19th  of  June,  1811,  and 
consisted,  besides  the  Bishops,  of  the  Deans,  and  one  Deputy 
from  each  Diocese.  It  was  here  that  the  famous  Fifteenth  Canon 
(which  is  now  the  Twenty-first)  was  drawn  up,  by  which  the 
Scottish  Communion  Office  was  declared  of  prinuirij  authority. 
The  Synod  sat  two  days,  and  the  Canons  were  forwarded  by  the 
Primus,  with  a  Circular  Letter,  to  the  English  and  Irish  Bishops. 

Bishop  Tony  was  most  vigilant  in  maintaining  his  beloved 
Office  on  all  possible  occasions.  Thus  he  writes,  under  Date 
April  1st,  1812,  on  Inducting  a  Presbyter  :— 

There  are  two  things,  however,  which  I  must  stipulate  for — first,  that 
the  Scotch  Communion  Office  be  retained  in  these  Chapels,  and  that  the 
niinds  of  the  people  be  not  distracted  by  any  proposal  of  a  change ;  and, 


PATRICK  TORRY.  353 

secondly,  that  you  remain  more  at  home  among  your  Flock  and  Family 
than  you  have  been  accustomed  to  do,  and  not  go  abroad  (but  when  urged 
by  a  reasonable  cause)  in  search  of  that  enjoyment  which  you  will  always 
more  certainly  find  in  the  pursuit  of  professional  knowledge,  in  attention  to 
the  duties  of  your  Pastoral  Charge,  in  frequent  intercourse  with  your  own 
Flock,  and  in  the  endearments  of  domestic  life. 

On  the  Death  of  Dr.  Laing,  at  Peterhead  (the  Priest  who 
had  been  schismaticalry  Ordained  by  Bishop  Trail,  but  who  since 
the  union  had  distinguished  himself  by  zeal  in  the  interests  of 
the  Scotch  Church),  the  two  Congregations  determined  to  unite 
under  the  Charge  of  Bishop  Torry. 

The  Committees  appointed  by  the  two  Episcopal  Congregations  of  this 
place  to  deliberate  upon  their  junction,  being  met,  and  having  seen  Bishop 
Torry 's  Letter,  agreeing  to  the  proposals  made  to  him  for  relinquishing  his 
own  Chapel  and  becoming  Pastor  to  the  united  Congregation,  are  much 
gratified  by  the  Bishop's  frank  and  easy  acquiescence,  and  by  the  very 
obliging  manner  he  writes  upon  the  subject.  The  Committees  think  it 
proper  to  give,  in  writing,  the  terms  which  they  communicated  to  Bishop 
Torry  by  a  Deputation  from  them,  viz.  : — 

That  Bishop  Torry 's  present  Chapel  is  to  be  turned  into  and  properly 
fitted  up  for  dwelling  houses,  at  the  expense  of  the  Proprietors  of  the  joint 
Chapel,  they  getting  the  pews  and  scats.  And  whatever  these  dwelling- 
houses  yield  of  rent  to  him  short  of  £35  per  annum,  to  be  made  lip  by  the 
Proprietors  of  the  joint  Chapel  (during  the  Bishop's  life),  who  are  to  pay  to 
Bishop  Torry  a  Stipend  of  .£150  a  year,  without  other  Emoluments,  or  £130 
a  year,  with  the  Offertories  at  the  Sacraments,  at  the  Bishop's  option. 

It  being  fully  understood  that,  in  the  event  of  Bishop  Tony's  Death, 
the    united   Congregation   shall   have   it   in   their   power   to   Nominate    a 
Successor,  to  be  approved  of  by  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese. 
Peterhead,  24th  July,  1812. 

This  led  to  the  erection  of  the  present  Chapel  at  Peterhead, 
at  a  cost  of  £'3, 500,  a  large  sum  for  that  time  and  place.  The 
poverty  of  the  Scottish  Church,  notwithstanding  her  relief  from 
Persecution,  still  remained  Apostolic,  as  the  next  Communica 
tion  may  show  :— 

Right  Rev.  Sir, — If  at  any  hereafter  period  you  should  hear  of  or 
receive  a  Suit  of  Episcopal  Robes,  you  will  please  to  attribute  them  to  a 
request  I  have  made  lately  to  Mr.  Horsley  of  Dundee,  to  ascertain  whether 
he  had  any  left  belonging  to  the  late  Bishop  of  S.  Asaph,  his  father,  and,  if 
he  has,  to  confer  them  upon  you.  The  reason  that  led  me  to  do  this  is,  that 
as  the  Primus  and  Bishops  Sandford  and  Gleig  have  Suits,  and  they  in  use 
of  theirs,  and  as  your  Diocese  is  situated  contiguous  to  them,  arid  many 
persons  of  rank  residing  in  it,  they  naturally  would  conceive  it  strange  that 
you  should  be  visiting  your  Clergy  in  a  Black  Gown,  when  the  neighbouring 
Bishops  are  now  otherwise  arrayed  :  they  little,  however,  consider  the  heavy 

VOL.  II.  Y 


854  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

expense  attending  the  purchase  of  such  Vestments,  and  that  it  is  not 
perfectly  essential  that  they  should  be  worn.  Certain  it  is,  that  at  the  Con 
secration  of  the  Scottish  Bishops  in  London,  in  the  time  of  the  Second 
Charles,  for  the  establishment  of  Episcopacy  in  this  Country,  those  Prelates 
were  clothed  in  Lawn  and  Black  Satin  ;  and  for  the  sake  of  that,  and  the 
close  communion  between  our  Episcopal  Church  here,  and  where  its 
establishment  is  so  considerable  in  the  by  far  greater  part  of  the  United 
Kingdom,  is  so  much  desirable,  an  uniformity  therefore  in  Dress  as  well  as 
Liturgy  (the  latter  of  which  is  now  happily  completed,  except  in  the 
Communion  Office,  which  no  reasonable  person  can  complain  of)  should  bo 
attended  to.  I  should  like  to  hear  that  the  two  Surplices  sent  some  time 
back  had  somewhere  been  put  to  use.  Bishops  Sandford  and  Glcig  wear 
their  liobes  erer//  Sacramental  Day,  and  I  hope  the  Primus,  who  wears  them 
on  Episcopal  occasions,  will  begin  to  follow  their  practice  on  the  approach 
ing  Festival.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly, 

Stonehaven,  lith  Dec.,  1812.  ALEX.  MITCHELL. 

On  Christmas  Day,  1814,  the  new  Chapel  at  Petcrhcad  was 
opened  ;  and  the  Sermon  which  Bishop  Tony  Preached  on  that 
occasion  was  afterwards  Published  by  him,  under  the  title  of 
"  The  Duty,  Dignity,  and  Beneficial  Effect  of  regularly  frequenting 
the  Public  Worship  of  Almighty  God." 

About  this  time  we  are  introduced  to  a  Correspondent  whose 
sympathy  and  support  must  have  greatly  cheered  the  declining 
years  of  the  Bishop's  life  —  Mr  Bowdlcr  of  Eltham,  whose  liber 
ality  to  the  Scottish  Church  was  really  unbounded. 


]i^}n>j>  To  try. 

I  have  now  perused  once  more  your  Letters  of  November  and  December 
last,  and  am  more  than  ever  struck  with  the  smallucss  of  the  sum,  and  the 
r.rrc.s.sj'n1  modesty  of  the  manner  in  which  you  ask  it,  for  the  repairs  of  these 
Chapels.  It  is  also  a  cordial  to  my  heart  to  observe  that  all  the  opinions 
you  have  occasion  to  state,  and  the  very  phrases  you  use,  arc  exactly  those 
which  I  was  taught  in  my  youth  by  my  excellent  parents,  and  from  which, 
I  thank  God,  I  have  seen  no  reason  to  depart  in  my  old  age. 

It  is  now  too  late  to  begin  any  large  expensive  works  this  year,  and  such 
must  not  be  attempted  without  computing  the  cost  and  comparing  their 
utility  with  that  of  others.  But  if  any  sum  not  exceeding  £50  can  be  so 
laid  out  within  your  Diocese  before  winter  as  to  promote  pure  lteli//io)i,  or  tJte 
decent  and  commodious  Wordtip  of  jm/>r  mul  jiiott*  Cltrixtninx,  pray  let  me  know 
it,  and  I  will  immediately  order  the  sum  you  name  to  be  at  your  command. 
Let  no  Christian  want  means  of  kneel  in;/  before  ///.s  (roil,  and  let  all  your  Lay 
Members  know  that  their  friends  in  England  lay  much  stress  on  this,  and 
muck  more  on  their  dutiful  submission  to  their  spiritual  Fathers,  their 
Bishops.  And  if  (which  God  forbid  !)  any  of  your  Clergy  are  deficient  in 
this  most  important  part  of  Duty  and  Doctrine,  let  them  know  that  all  the 
assistance,  countenance,  and  support,  which  they  have  received,  is  owing  to 
their  Bishops. 


PATRICK  TOEEY.  355 

I  am  a  great  friend  to  open  free  sittings  instead  of  petes,  and  we  are 
promoting  such  as  much  as  possible  here. 
Eltliam,  August  dth,  1815. 

Mr.  Jjoicdler  to  Bishop  Torn/. 

I  beg  you  to  let  me  know  without  delay  whether  there  are  now  any 
Chapels  in  your  Diocese  which  need  repair,  and  whose  Congregations  are 
unable  to  repair  them,  and  what  sum  it  would  require  to  repair  them.  .  . 
.  .  .  Your  Diocese  has  had  less  aid  from  my  fund  than  any  other, 
except  Bishop  Jolly's,  which  has  had  none  as  yet. 

As  there  is  a  Chapel  at  Perth,  I  am  willing  to  hope  it  will  sooner  or 
later  come  under  your  jurisdiction  ;  at  present  at  least  I  cannot  contribute 
towards  a  new  one  there,  for  I  am  very  earnest  to  get  one  built  at  Fort 
William,  and  should  be  very  glad  to  get  one  at  Ayr,  and  also  in  or  near  the 
Western  Islands. 

Eltliam,  March  14th,  1810. 

The  continued  difficulties  made  at  Brechin,  with  reference  to 
the  Scotch  Office,  fomented  by  the  efforts  and  Writings  of  the 
Eev.  Norman  Sievewright,  gave  occasion  to  a  Correspondence 
among  the  Prelates. 

fiixhnp  Torri/  to  Bixhnp  Glcuj. 

If  Mr.  Stratton's  people  choose  to  come  under  Mr.  Moir's  Pastoral  care, 
he  need  not  fear  that  his  adherence  to  his  former  practice  will  prove  any  bar 
to  that  (lcsi)-(tlle  measure.  At  least  were  I  in  his  place  I  should  not  fear  it. 
A  similar  case  has  occurred  to  me  in  this  Town,  where  the  prejudices,  till 
of  late,  were  as  strong  against  our  Church  as  anywhere  in  Scotland ;  yet, 
when  on  the  Death  of  Dr.  Laing,  an  union  was  formed  between  his  Congre 
gation  and  mine,  I  departed  in  no  instance  from  my  former  practice,  and  they 
have  since  been  partakers  of  the  Eucharist  from  my  hands  without  even  a 
whisper  of  discontent.  I,  for  one,  therefore,  am  for  a  strict  adherence  to 
the  letter  of  the  Canon,  without  presuming,  however,  to  dictate  to  my 
Colleagues.  This  slight  difference  of  opinion  will,  I  am  persuaded,  occasion 
no  diminution  of  mutual  regard  between  us. 
Peterhead,  December  5th,  1810. 

On  28th  June,  1819,  the  Rev.  John  Skinner  of  Forfar  ad 
dressed  a  Letter  to  his  Bishop,  insisting  upon  a  Charge  and  a 
Diocesan  Synod,  to  which  came  the  following  Rejoinder  :— 

The  holding  of  Synodical  Meetings  is,  in  my  view,  purely  a  question  of 
expediency,  and  not  of  indispensable  duty ;  and  the  expediency  of  holding 
them  in  the  Diocese  of  Dunkeld  did  not  hitherto  appear  to  me,  any  more 
than  to  my  two  Colleagues  in  the  North,  Bishop  Jolly  and  Bishop  Macfar- 
lane  (now  with  God),  neither  of  whom  ever  delivered  a  Charge  to  their 
Clergy  Synodically  assembled,  and  neither  of  whom  would  have  omitted  any 
thing  that  seemed  conducive  to  the  welfare  of  their  respective  portions  of  the 
Household  of  Faith.  I  am  willing,  however,  to  allow  the  credit  of  the  best 
intentions  to  those  of  my  Colleagues  who  have  done  it,  and  to  say  with  an 


35C  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Apostle,  that  "they  have  done  it  to  the  Lord;"  while  I  claim  for  myself 
and  my  Northern  Colleagues  the  right  of  applying  the  same  Apostle's 
language  in  our  own  behalf,  and  to  say,  "  to  the  Lord  we  have  done  it  not." 
But  the  time  may  come,  and  may  soon  come,  when  I  shall  judge  it  a  measure 
both  expedient  and  tending  to  edification.  Much  indeed  will  depend  on  the 
harmony  that  may  appear  among  the  Clergy  of  my  Diocese  at  my  ensuing 
Visitation;  and,  in  the  meantime,  1  may  take  the  opportunity  of  annexing 
to  my  Address  to  the  Candidates  for  Confirmation,  some  thoughts  on  the 
duties  of  the  Clerical  Office,  which  ought  to  be  habitually  predominant  in 
our  minds  and  exemplified  in  our  practice.  But  I  have  no  intention  of 
giving  my  thoughts  the.  formality  of  a  Charge,  nor  of  convening,  for  the 
present,  a  greater  number  of  my  Clergy  in  any  place  than  what  are  usually 
to  be  seen  on  such  occasions.  So  that  what  1  intend  to  do  need  not  prevent 
your  t.'irctili'iicil  «]>)>t'«l,  which  has  excited  in  my  mind  neither  the  least  appre 
hension  nor  the  smallest  resentment,  as  I  shall  prove  by  acepting  your 
invitation  to  Inchgarth ;  though  perhaps  a  similar  invitation  was  never 
given  with  such  an  appendage  annexed  to  it.  With  the  utmost  Christian 
goodwill,  therefore,  1  commend  you  and  your  concerns  to  God's  blessing, 
and  am  your  affectionate  and  faithful  Brother  in  Christ, 

Peterhead,  August  11,  1819.  PATRICK  TOERY. 

In  August,  1821,  Bishop  Tony  lost  his  eldest  daughter. 

In  July,  1822,  Scotland  was  thrown  into  a  fervour  of  loyalty 
by  the  intelligence  that  George  IV.  proposed  to  visit  Edinburgh. 
The  Bishops  naturally  felt  themselves  on  very  delicate  ground  ; 
and  were  confused  by  the  variety  of  advice  they  received  as  to 
the  manner  in  which  they  were  to  appear  at  Court.  Primus 
Gleig  seems  to  have  been  the  only  man  who  maintained  his 
presence  of  mind  on  so  exciting  an  occasion. 

To   ]>ixJx>}>  Skinner. 

At  the  Levee,  I  have  the  Archbishop's  authority  for  saying  that  we  are 
to  appear  in  our  Clowns  and  Cassocks;  but  should  the  King  receive  us  on 
his  throne,  which  is  very  little  probable,  we  must  appear  in  our  Lawn 
Sleeves.  We  should  surely  meet  if  possible  at  least  a  day  or  two  before  we 
go  to  Court,  and  I  hope  that  each  of  us  will  bring  with  him  the  scroll  of  an 
Address,  that  from  the  whole  a  clean  Copy  may  be  drawn  up.  I  need  not 
tell  I/OH,  but  perhaps  it  may  be  necessary  for  you  to  tell  the  Bishops  Jolly 
and  Torry,  that  we  must  not  appear  at  Court  without  InMcs  on  our  aliow  ; 
and  that  no  Clergyman,  except  when  in  Procession  as  a  Member  of  one  of 
the  Universities,  has  ever  been  received  in  Court,  since  the  Accession  of  the 
House  of  Hanover,  in  the  Gown  of  a  Master  of  Arts!  Mr.  Horsley  was 
once  refused  admission  because  he  appeared  in  the  Gown  of  a  Master  of 
Arts,  and  was  obliged  to  hurry  home  for  another  Gown.  I  remain,  &c., 
Stirling,  July  19,  1822.  GEORGE  GLEIG. 

Good  Bishop  Jolly  took  the  matter  in  his  own  way,  and  thus 
writes  to  Bishop  Torry,  July  22nd,  1822 : — 


PATRICK  TOEEY.  357 

If  we  must  go  forward  on  this  astonishing  journey,  I  beg  that  your 
fraternal  kindness  will  take  me  in  charge,  and  make  me  sharer  in  your  plan, 
sending  me  the  earliest  notice.  God  grant  that  all  may  aim  and  cud  well. 
I  take  comfort  in  our  mutual  prayers. 

Alas  !  the  good  man  little  knew  what  mental  anxiety  lie  was 
at  that  very  moment  causing  some  of  his  Brethren.  It  appears 
that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  wearing  a  certain  most  exceptionable 
Wig;  of  which  the  Primus  declares,  "  the  King  will  never  be  able 
to  stand  the  sight  of  it." 

Whether  Bishop  Jolly  followed  the  advice  of  his  Brethren, 
and  provided  himself  with  a  new  Wig,  does  not  appear  ;  but  the 
King  was,  at  all  events,  excessively  struck  with  his  appearance, 
and  made  particular  inquiries  respecting  him. 

Towards  the  end  of  182-1  a  proposal  was  made  to  the  Scottish 
Church  for  the  Consecration  of  Bishop  Luscombe. 


My  opinion  is,  and  ahvays  has  been,  in  favour  of  Dr.  Luscombe's  Con 
secration;  not  for  the  purpose  of  forming  (as  he  expresses  himself)  "a 
visible  L'Inurh  of  J-'iii/laml  in  France,"  which  cannot  be,  but  for  the  purpose 
of  forming  a  regularly  constituted  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  hi  France, 
which  I  shall  hail  as  a  grand  event. 

I  am,  however,  decidedly  unfavourable  to  a  Consecration  at  large, 
without  previous  Election,  which,  if  done,  may  be  a  dangerous  precedent, 
and  the  subject  of  much  humiliating  altercation  afterwards. 

If  the  Episcopal  Clergy  presently  in  France  be  not  hostile  to  Dr.  Lus 
combe's  views,  I  can  sec  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  suffrage  of  two  or 
three  at  least,  to  the  Charge  of  whom,  with  their  Flocks,  he  might  be  regu 
larly  collated  as  their  head  under  Christ,  the  Universal  Head.  Unless  this 
be  done,  it  docs  not  appear  to  me  that  the  Consecration  can  be,  in  the 
Apostle's  language,  lt  sv<t%r)(j,6vus  z.a!  ~/.ara  rdfyv.'' 

But,  as  I  said  before,   it'  my   Colleagues   shall  determine  differently, 

thinking  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  case  warrants  a  departure  from  the 

common  rule,  to  such  determination,  although  I  cannot  alter  my  opinion,  I 

.shall  bow  with  deference,  and  heartily  pray  for  a  special  blessing  on  the 

•work  of  their  hands. 

The  result  was  tho  Consecration  of  Dr.  Luscombe  at  Stirling, 
on  Palm  Sunday,  March  20th,  182-3,  by  the  Bishops  Gleig,  of 
Brechin  ;  Sandford,  of  Edinburgh  ;  and  Low,  of  Ross  and  Argyll. 
Bishop  Low  often  said  to  me  that  "he  would  never  do  the  like 
again."  He  saw  his  error  in  contending  so  valiantly  for  what 
wras  an  invasion  and  false  mission. 

In  1826,  Bishop  Tony,  through  the  influence  of  Bishop  Low, 


358  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

received  the  Degree  of  D.D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania. 
The  same  honours  came  to  Bishop  Jolly. 

Dixhnp  (il/'i/j  to  JiixJmp  Torn/. 

I  completed  my  eighty-first  ycnr  yesterday,  and  have  not  been  able 
these  five  years  to  go  into  bed  or  come  out  of  it,  and  far  less  to  go  up  and 
down  stairs,  without  help.  The  consequence  is,  that  I  have  not  visited  my 
Diocese  these  six  years,  nor  lias  the  Sacred  Ordinance  of  Confirmation 
during  that  long  period  been  regularly  administered  in  it.  I  have  learned 
that  you  intend  to  visit  your  Diocese  this  season,  and  may  I  beg  the  favour 
of  you  to  Confirm  likewise  in  mine  '.'  I  do  not  expect  you  to  take  the  trouble 
of  visiting  <r<r//  <  'luijid  in  my  Diocese  ;  but  if  you  will  agree  to  my  request, 
and  name  the  days  when  you  can  officiate  in  Stonchavcn,  Brechin,  and 
Dundee,  I  will  order  the  Ministers  of  other  Chapels  to  bring  their  Candidates 
for  Confirmation  to  these  or  any  other  places  that  you  may  name  as  more 
convenient  for  yourself.  I  have  repeatedly  asked  for  a  Coadjutor,  which,  I 
believe,  was  never  before  refused  in  this  Church  to  any  aged  and  infirm 
Bishop. 

Stirling,  May  13,  1835. 


to  the  Kfinie. 

I  never  make  use  of  the  Sign  of  the  Cross  in  administering  the  Kite  of 
Confirmation.  Bishop  Rait  never  did  ;  and  he  performed  all  his  Episcopal 
duties  in  a  more  dignified  and  impressive  manner  than  any  other  of  my 
Predecessors  whom  I  have  witnessed.  When  you  arc  at  Coupar-Angus, 
might  not  you  and  your  son  make  a  trip  to  Stirling,  and  pass  a  day  or  two 
with  me?  I  have  much  to  say  to  you  of  great  importance  to  this  poor 
Church,  and  am  not  able  to  go  to  you  ;  and  you  and  your  son  arc  likely  to 
meet  with  my  son  and  John's  friend,  who  proposes  to  visit  his  father, 
perhaps  for  the  last  time,  about  the  end  of  July  ;  and  from  them  we  may 
get  some  information  that  may  be  useful  to  our  Church. 
Stirling,  May  20,  1835. 

Bishop  lorry  readily  complied  with  the  wish  of  the  good  old 
Primus  to  Confirm  for  him  in  his  Diocese  ;  and  on  the  30th  of 
May  thus  wrote  to  his  son  :— 

It  is  my  full  intention  to  commence  my  journey  (with  God's  permission) 
to  Perthshire,  on  Monday  morning,  the  6th  of  July.  After  resting  a  few 
hours  in  Aberdeen,  I  propose  to  go  forward,  by  the  Mail,  to  Stonehaveu,  to 
Confirm  in  the  Chapel  there  on  Tuesday  ;  and,  on  Tuesday  afternoon,  to  go 
on  to  Laurcncekirk,  where  I  should  like  very  much  to  meet  you,  if  old 
Trust;/  [his  son's  horse]  be  able  to  bring  you  on,  in  your  gig,  to  that  Village. 
On  Wednesday  morning,  early,  we  would  start,  in  your  gig,  for  Brechin, 
where  I  would  Confirm  that  day  all  the  young  people  presented  to  me  by 
Mr.  Moir,  Mr.  Henderson,  Mr.  Cushnie,  Mr.  Goalen,  and  Mr.  Jolly.  We 
may  remain  for  the  remainder  of  the  day  at  Brechin,  or,  if  the  evening  be 
dry  and  pleasant,  go  on  to  Forfar,  wThere  we  would  find  Mr.  Skinner  -waiting 
for  us.  At  any  rate,  I  must  do  duty  in  Forfar  Chapel  on  Thursday,  which 
will  conclude  my  labours  for  that  week.  My  subsequent  peregrinations  in 


PATRICK  TOEEY.  359 

the  Highlands,  you  already  know.  After  returning,  in  the  end  of  the  week, 
to  Baldinny,  and  stopping  over  a  second  Sunday  with  you,  we  will  go  down 
to  Dundee  on  Monday  afternoon,  where  I  am  to  Confirm  in  Mr.  Horsley's 
Chapel,  on  Tuesday  the  21st  of  July,  which  will  conclude  my  labours 
he-north  the  Tay.  I  will  return  with  you  from  Dundee  to  Baldinny,  for  the 
third  time,  and  after  resting  with  you  for  another  day,  I  will  take  a  place  in 
the  "Defiance,"  and  go  to  South  Queen's  Ferry,  where  Tom  is  to  meet  me. 
Bishop  Gleig  intrcats  me  to  visit  him  at  Stirling,  and  wishes  to  see  you 
also,  because  you  would  have  a  chance  of  meeting  with  your  old  friend, 
Eobert  Gleig.  He  writes  that  he  has  much  to  say  to  me  about  the  state  of 
our  Church.  Of  this  we  can  talk  when  we  meet. 

A  severe  affliction  befel  the  Bishop  ahont  this  time — the 
Death  of  his  youngest  daughter,  Mrs.  Smith,  at  Bellary,  in 
Madras. 

While  assiduous  in  the  duties  of  his  Office,  the  Bishop  occa 
sionally  amused  himself  with  lighter  occupations.  He  thus 
writes  to  his  son,  the  Dean  of  St.  Andrews,  &c.  :— 

You  must  know  I  was  a  Poet  in  my  youthful  days,  or  at  least  thought 
so.  But,  as  my  Muse  seemed  more  inclined  to  lash  the  follies  of  my  neigh 
bours  than  to  correct  my  own,  I  had  the  sense  to  see  that  it  would  be  an  act 
of  wisdom  to  restrain  her.  There  is  one  subject,  however,  on  which  I  have 
a  wish  to  exercise  my  poetical  genius,  if  any  yet  remains.  It  is  the  Divinely 
recorded  fact  of  Christ  Walking  on  the  Water  of  the  Galilean  Sea.  It  is  a 
noble  theme,  and  I  have  never  seen  it  handled,  not  even  alluded  to,  by  any 
Poet.  But,  alas  !  with  me  planning  and  executing  are  very  different  things: 
I  have  not  yet  written  a  single  line  of  it." 

In  a  subsequent  Letter,  of  February  3,  1837,  he  says  : • 

I  am  engaged  with  my  Poem  :  I  propose  dividing  it  into  three  Cantos, 
and  have  finished  the  first,  consisting  of  one  hundred  and  two  lines. 

CHRIST  WALKING  ON  THE  SEA  OF  GALILEE, 

M'itJt  (tlliisiuiis  to  rur'uniH  circumstances  j>m'c<l!nt/,  «ccoinji(i»yi»(/,  ami  folhui-'nui 
tJtttt  wonderful  exhibition  oj  Omnipotent  Poiccr. 

Canto  /. 

A  theme,  a  mighty  theme,  before  me  lies, 

And  glorious  scenes  in  quick  succession  rise. 

Oh,  for  a  Southey's  or  a  Wordsworth's  skill, 

To  paint  the  wonders  which  my  mind  do  fill ! 

The  grand  display  of  power  with  meekness  join'd  5 

(Piesistless  power  with  Heav'nly  love  combin'd), 

Which  shone  in  Him  Who  came  a  world  to  save, 

And  rescue  sinful  mortals  from  the  grave — 

The  grave  from  which  Himself  victorious  rose  ; 

As  shall  the  faithful  who  on  Him  repose  10 

Their  hope  and  trust,  in  this  brief  span  of  life, 

And,  like  Him,  live  in  peace,  abjuring  strife. 


3GO  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

The  faithless,  too,  shall  rise,  but  not  to  joy — 
Their  Judge  omnipotent  shall  them  destroy. 
Oh  !  that  in  time  the  thoughtless  would  reflect,  15 

And  not  the  terms  of  Hcav'nly  bliss  neglect ; 
For  He  Who  Satan's  wrath  and  Man's  outbrav'd, 
ir/7/.s-  none  to  perish,  but  that  all  be  sav'd. 
For  this  He  left  the  Realms  of  glory  bright, 
Assum'd  our  form,  and  pour'd  a  Hood  of  light  20 

On  this  benighted  world  ;  and  peace  proclaim'd 
To  all  with  sin  and  Satan's  thraldom  pain'd, 
Who  Hcav'nly  bliss  prefer  to  earthly  gains, 
And  seek  deliv'rance  from  their  galling  chains. 

His  mighty  work  what  mortal  tongue  can  tell !  25 

Access  to  Heaven,  deliverance  from  Hell. 
This  none  but  He  could  merit,  none  obtain 
Such  boon  to  those  whom  Sin  and  Death  had  slain. 
"  It  must  for  ever  have  been  let  alone," 
If  God  and  Man  had  not  been  join'd  in  one.  oO 

In  progress  of  that  work,  it  once  bcfel, 
As  His  inspir'd  Evangelists  us  do  tell, 
That,  tir'd  with  labour  in  His  work  of  Grace, 
Ho  sought  retirement  in  a  desert  place, 

And  food  and  rest  both  for  Himself  and  friends,  i]5 

On  which  our  nature,  while  on  earth,  depends — 
Even  He  claim'd  not  exemption  from  that  law, 
But,  like  all  others,  was  content  to  draw 
Refreshment  to  His  pure,  but  mortal  frame, 
As  other  mortals  wuxt,  devoid  of  blame.  -10 

Yet  of  His  patience,  ////*  Innr  (/mil  ///<•  tfxt, 
To  have  110  place  to  lay  His  head  to  rest. 
But  do  we  read  His  anger  thence  was  mov'd  ? 
No,  it  His  great  compassion  only  prov'd  ; 

For  though  of  sin  He  is  the  deadly  foe,  45 

And  will  at  last  adjudge  't  to  endless  woe, 
Yet  while  on  earth,  to  sinners  He  was  kind, 
And  cur'd  their  ills  of  body  and  of  mind  ; 
And  still  in  Heaven  He  hears  their  piteous  cry, 
When  they  before  Him  in  prostration  lie.  50 

As  night  approach'd,  still  studious  of  their  good, 
His  power  Divine  provided  for  them  food ; 
Nor  did  He  them  dismiss  at  close  of  day, 
Each  hung'ring,  lest  they'd  perish  by  the  way  ; 
For  many  came  from  far,  as  well  as  near,  55 

His  power  to  witness,  and  His  truths  to  hear. 
They  saw  His  wondrous  power,  such  truths  they  heard, 
As  kings  and  righteous  men  had  never  shar'd. 
Five  barley  loaves  and  fishes  only  two, 

When  bless'd  by  Him  to  wondrous  plenty  grew —  CO 

A  store  exhaustless  till  the  guests  were  fill'd, 
Five  thousand  guests  had  thence  their  cravings  still'd. 
0  power  omnipotent,  divinely  great ! 
0  bounty  far  beyond  our  power  to  state  ! 


PATEICK  TOEEY.  361 

Yet  not  alone  were  these  displays  of  might  G5 

A  proof  of  love  ;  hut  demonstration  bright 

That  He  who  all  things  made,  and  them  controls, 

The  promis'd  Saviour  was  of  human  souls. 

The  wondrous  miracles  of  various  kinds 

Did  each  its  moral  teach  to  thoughtful  minds.  70 

The  blind  who  had  his  sight  restor'd,  might  see 

That  He  who  op'd  his  bod'ly  eyes,  could  free 

His  soul  from  mental  darkness,  and  display 

The  path  that  leads  to  never-ending  Day. 

And  to  this  light,  in  order  to  be  blest,  75 

He'd  but  to  look ;  and  thus  of  all  the  rest. 

Such  wondrous  mercies  daily  God  bestows, 

On  mortals  still  thu  prone  to  break  their  vows. 

They  love  the  gifts,  the  Giver  they  forget ; 

The  bounty  charms,  but  who  so  apt  to  fret  80 

As  he  who  has  been  bless'd  with  ample  store, 

And  yet  who  has  a  quenchless  thirst  for  more  ? 

From  such  content,  that  sweetest  blessing  flics 

To  humble  hearts,  or  to  its  native  skies, 

Whence  every  good  and  perfect  gift  descend,  85 

To  cheer  and  guide  us  to  a  happy  end ; 

And  us  our  Benefactor  teach  to  love, 

And  thirst  for  happiness  in  the  Realms  above. 

'Tis  thus  our  deadly  foes  we  can  withstand, 

And  learn  t'  obey  our  Heav'nly  Lord's  command  ;  90 

That  freed  from  this  world's  turmoil  and  its  strife, 

We  labour  for  the  Food  of  Endless  Life. 

Be  this  my  aim,  that  I,  through  Heav'nly  Grace, 
In  peace  with  God  and  man  may  close  my  race. 

Citnto  II. 

The  shades  of  eve  were  now  approaching  fast, 

And  nature's  robes  of  grey  were  round  her  cast ; 

And  barren  rocks,  and  hills  so  lately  green, 

In  strange  confusion  now  were  dimly  seen. 

Then,  ere  the  night  her  sable  robes  put  on,  5 

Christ  bade  His  chosen  friends  depart  for  home, 

Till  He  the  multitude  should  send  away, 

And  close  the  Heav'nly  work  of  that  blest  day, 

By  sending  each  recipient  of  His  grace, 

With  heart  enlarg'd,  to  His  own  lowly  place.  10 

Which  done,  it  was  His  purpose  to  repair 

In  that  abode  of  solitude  to  Prayer. 

His  friends  obey'd,  and  straight  made  haste  to  take 
Their  ship  to  cross  the  Galilean  Lake. 

Nor,  that  command  recciv'd,  deem'd  they  it  meet  15 

To  ask  irhcre  they  again  their  Lord  should  greet ; 
Nor  u-hcn,  nor  by  what  means,  He  should  return 
Unto  the  wonted  place  of  His  sojourn. 
For  the  wonders  wrought  that  clay  on  the  distress'd, 
With  awe  mysterious  had  their  souls  impress'd ;  20 

VOL.  II.  2  / 


362  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

That  day  when  sickness,  pinching  want,  and  grief, 

In  joy  retir'd,  each  having  found  relief. 

Nor  was  it  strange  that  such  displays  of  love, 

This  boundless  power  to  simplest  minds  should  prove. 

But  of  His  presence  thus  to  he  bereft,  25 

An  air  of  sadness  on  their  hearts  had  left. 

And  yet,  from  disobedience  being  free, 

Without  reluctance  they  prepar'd  for  sea. 

Scarce  was  their  Bark  upon  the  waters  lauuch'd, 
And  they  had  but  a  little  way  advanc'd,  30 

When  signs  of  change  on  sky  and  sea  appcar'd ; 
The  sky  did  lower,  the  sea  its  waves  uprear'd, 
While  adverse  winds  their  passage  did  impede. 
They  ply'd  their  oars,  but  little  progress  made. 
It  was  a  night  of  toil  and  dire  dismay  :  35 

He  was  not  there,  Whom  winds  and  seas  obey. 
Their  Guide  in  doubt,  their  Shield  in  danger  near, 
Was  absent  when  their  hearts  were  fill'd  with  fear. 
They  could  not  then,  as  when  in  like  distress, 
Say — "  Save  us,  Lord,  the  stormy  winds  repress;  40 

We  perish  else.     Awake,  and  set  us  free 
From  danger  great,  and  our  Deliv'rer  be." 
We  need  not  doubt  His  absence  they  bewail'd, 
When  thus  in  jeopardy  their  courage  quail'd. 
Perhaps  they  reason'd — "  Had  our  Lord  been  here  45 

(Our  gracious  Lord),  we'd  had  no  cause  of  fear. 
In  danger  did  we  e'er  to  Him  repair  - 
And  miss  a  gracious  answer  to  our  prayer '? 
Oh  !  were  He  j>rexent  note,  when  peril's  great, 
'T  would  cheer  our  hearts,  and  confidence  beget.  50 

No  hazard,  then,  of  finding  wat'ry  graves — 
His  word  would  calm  the  winds  and  still  the  Avaves  ; 
For  such  deliv'rance  we  have  found  before, 
And  nnn-  would  find,  if  we  could  Him  implore." 
Thus  spoke,  at  Bethany,  His  friends  well  tried—  55 

"  Hadst  Thou  been  here,  our  brother  had  not  died." 
Such  thoughts  and  words  bespoke  a  slow  belief 
And  knowledge  small  of  Him  their  glorious  Chief. 
It  seemed  as  yet  their  faith  and  views  were  weak 
Of  Christ  the  Lord  ;  else,  where  the  need  to  seek  GO 

His  bod'ly  presence,  Who  all  space  doth  fill, 
And  all  things  guide  according  to  His  will  ? 
Nor  time  nor  space  can  sep'rate  man  from  Him — 
That  mischief  springs  from  unrepented  sin. 

This  truth,  the  cordial  of  all  those  who  see  G5 

An  omnipresent  Lord  in  Christ  to  be, 
Was  faintly  known  (how  strange  !)  and  dimly  seen 
By  those  who  daily  witnesses  had  been 
Of  power  Divine,  of  knowledge  without  bound, 
And  mercy  mild,  in  none  else  to  be  found.  70 

During  these  fears,  that  border'd  on  despair, 
The  Saviour  was  engag'd  in  solemn  Prayer. 


PATRICK  TORRY.  363 

By  Him  the  troubles  of  His  friends  were  known — 

Yea,  sent  in  love  to  make  them  more  His  own ; 

To  teach  the  value  of  His  guardian  care,  75 

And  train  their  hearts  for  trials  to  prepare  ; 

To  bear  their  Cross,  fulfil  their  works  of  love, 

And  follow  Him  to  gain  the  Realms  above. 

That  this,  and  much  besides,  He  for  them  sought 

When  fixed  in  rapt'rous  intercourse  of  thought  80 

With  's  Heav'nly  Father,  Whose  most  blessed  will 

He  came  to  earth,  in  mercy,  to  fulfil, 

We  need  not  doubt ;  nor  need  we  less  believe 

How  blest  the  answer  was  He  did  receive. 

What  for  a  world  of  sinners  could  avail,  85 

When  offer'd  for  His  rluwii  could  not  fail. 

How  high  the  joy,  how  cheering  'tis  to  know, 
That  we,  corrupt  and  sinful  here  below, 
May,  if  in  Him  our  confidence  AVC  place, 

Find  easy  access  to  the  Throne  of  Grace.  90 

The  Father  loves,  the  Spirit  grants  His  aid, 
To  all  whose  confidence  on  Christ  is  staid. 
'Twixt  God  and  us  the  variance  wrought  by  sin 
Had  made  us  sad,  and  hopeless  but  for  Him ; 
Yet,  thro'  His  grace  and  interposal  kind,  95 

Our  blessings  lost  we  shall  not  fail  to  find  ; 
If  with  desire  we  seek,  we  shall  not  miss 
To  find,  thro'  Him,  the  Avay  that  leads  to  bliss. 
Our  cause  He  pleads,  He  strengthens  with  His  grace 
All  those  who  strive  to  run  their  Heav'nly  race.  100 

To  man  infirm,  corrupt,  and  with  sin  stain'd, 
The  need  of  Prayer  is  easily  explain'd ; 
But  whence  the  need  to  Christ,  unstain'd  by  sin, 
Spotless  without,  more  glorious  still  within  ? 
His  human  frame  within  it  did  enshrine  105 

A  Heav'nly  Guest,  essentially  Divine  ; 
Which,  tho  united  thus,  the  Fruit  of  love, 
Is  Lord  of  all  on  earth  and  heav'n  above  : 
All  nature  owns  His  universal  sway, 

And  powers  and  principalities  obey.  HO 

These  rights  possessed,  what  need  of  Prayer  had  He 
To  pray,  at  Whose  blest  Name  all  bend  the  knee — 
All  things  in  heav'n  and  earth  must  own  Him  Lord 
Who  call'd  them  into  being  by  His  word. 

With  rev'rence  then  be  it  ask'd  again,  what  need  115 

Of  Prayer  had  He  to  whom  all  Prayer  is  made  ? 
And  yet  we  know  herein  He  greatly  joy'd — 
The  Mount  and  Desert  saw  Him  thus  employ'd ; 
Yea  such  was  His  desire  and  love  to  pray, 
That  oft  for  thin  He  rose  before  'twas  day.  120 

It  hence  arose  :  Our  nature  He  assum'd 
To  save  us  from  the  wrath  by  justice  doom'd, 
And  make  atonement  for  man's  dire  offence, 
Because  none  other  could  such  grace  dispense. 


364  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

The  nature  that  rebell'cl  the  price  must  pay,  125 

And  none  but  He  the  ransom  down  could  lay. 

No  creature  could,  how  high  soc'er  his  grade, 

The  payment  make,  which  sin  had  needful  made  : 

To  merit  our  deliv'rance,  none  but  One 

Could  equal  be,  and  He  both  God  and  Man.  130 

As  Man  He  shar'd  our  frailties  and  our  fears, 

And,  therefore,  pray'd  with  crying  strong,  and  tears. 

While  thus  engag'd  He  felt,  His  soul  within, 

Our  whole  infirmities,  excepting  sin ; 

And  the  burden  of  that  guilt  He  had  transferr'd  135 

Upon  Himself  from  us  who'd  solely  err'd. 

His  need  of  Prayer  for  support  under  these 

Was  strongly  felt,  nor  did  less  greatly  please. 

And  tho  for  us  He  chose  our  griefs  to  bear, 

Yet  that  He  was  Divine  He  made  appear ;  140 

For,  lo  !  those  friends  whom  for  a  time  he  left, 

And  of  His  blest  society  bereft, 

Beheld  a  sight  which  tcrrifi'd  their  minds, 

Above  the  terrors  rais'd  by  waves  and  winds. 

Amid  the  darkness  of  that  stormy  night,  145 

The  object  seen  was  compassrd  with  light : 

A  human  Form  it  secm'd,  and  mov'd  in  state, 

And  in  its  motion  spread  a  radiance  great 

Upon  the  liquid  surface  of  the  deep, 

Which  form'd  a  solid  pavement  for  His  feet.  150 

Where'er  the  Figure  mov'd  its  splendour  shone, 

And  seem'd  to  hush  the  storm,  and  say,  "  Be  gone." 

But  still,  as  this  mysterious  Guest  drew  near, 

The  Apostles'  minds  were  terrifi'd  with  fear. 

They  shriek'd  aloud,  unconscious  of  His  love,  155 

And  judg'd  Him  sent  a  Spirit  from  above, 

Perhaps  their  awful  doom  then  to  proclaim, 

And  all  their  hopes  of  safety  prove  in  vain. 

Form'd  on  the  liquid  surface  of  the  main, 

But  'scap'd  from  thence  they  wildly  rage  again  ;  160 

Tho  all  around  tumultuously  they  rag'd, 

Like  crowds  untrain'd  in  deadly  broil  engag'd. 

Bishop  Tony  resigned  his  Pastoral  Charge  of  S.  Peter's, 
Peterhead,  in  the  Autumn  of  1837.  His  Successor  in  the  Charge 
was  the  Rev.  Charles  Cole,  at  present  Incumbent  of  S.  John's, 
Greenock.  He  was  a  Blue  Coat  School  Boy. 

In  the  Episcopal  Synod  holden  at  Aberdeen  in  1844,  the 
ancient  title  of  St.  Andrews  was  substituted  for  that  of  Fife. 
From  that  period,  instead  of  the  title  "  Dunkeld,  Dunblane,  and 
Fife,"  Bishop  lorry  assumed  that  of  "  St.  Andrews,  Dunkeld, 
and  Dunblane." 


PATEICK  TOEEY.  365 

The  Bishop's  determination  to  defend  "  The  Scotch  Commun 
ion  Office"  was  illustrated  by  a  Letter  which  he  addressed  to  the 
Rev.  H.  Malcolm,  of  S.  Mary's,  Dunblane,  on  June  23,  1845.  At 
the  Consecration  of  this  Church,  "  The  Scotch  Office"  was  used 
and  manfully  insisted  on  to  some  influential  members  of  the  Flock 
by  the  llev.  Dr.  John  Alexander,  of  S.  Columba's,  Edinburgh, 
who  preached  an  outspoken  and  excellent  Sermon  for  the  occasion. 

On  the  whole,  as  the  Spiritual  Father  of  the  Congregation  of  S.  Mary's, 
whom  I  am  bound  by  many  considerations  highly  to  respect,  I  have  thus 
deemed  it  my  duty  to  recommend  most  earnestly  the  continued  use  of  the 
Scotch  Communion  Ofiice,  as  most  profitable  for  them,  by  contributing  most 
effectually  to  the  health  of  their  souls  ;  but  the  idea  of  attempting  to  force 
them  to  its  adoption  is  altogether  out  of  the  question. 

The  leading  feature  of  the  Bishop's  character,  was  called 
into  play  by  two  circumstances  which  occurred  during  the  present 
year,  viz., — The  discussion  on  the  subject  of  the  Communion 
Office  to  be  used  at  Trinity  College,  Glenalmond,  now  approach 
ing  its  completion  ;  and  the  Blairgowrie  Appeal.  -The  Council  of 
Trinity  College  was  very  nearly  balanced  in  its  preference  of  the 
two  Offices.  On  the  one  hand,  it  was  proposed  that  the  English 
Liturgy  should  be  exclusively  adopted ;  on  the  other,  it  was 
contended  that  the  two  should  be  used  alternately,  or  during 
stated  and  alternate  periods.  The  leader  of  the  "Anti-National 
party"  was  Bishop  Low,  who  tried  to  annul  "  The  Scotch  Office." 

A  small  Congregation  had  been  formed  in  the  Village  of 
Blairgowrie,  by  the  exertions  of  the  Eev.  John  Marshall,  who  at 
one  time  was  stationed  in  Kirkcaldy.  [See  Scotichronicon,  vol. 
ii.,  p.  328.]  "  The  Scotch  Office"  had  been  here  primarily  used 
by  him,  but  under  the  Eev.  John  Peter  Alley,  Ph.  D.,  the 
English  Liturgy  was  adopted.  Mr.  Alley  was  Ordained  by 
Bishop  Low,  who  opined,  at  the  time,  that  he  had  caught  a  man 
of  fortune.  The  Eev.  Duncan  Mackenzie,  now  a  Sheep  Farmer 
in  New  Zealand,  late  of  Duror  and  Portnacroish,  happened  to 
stroll  up  to  Edinburgh  Castle  to  view  Mons  Meg,  &c.,  when  he 
met  with  our  Adventurer.  The  two,  in  the  course  of  conversa 
tion,  came  to  discuss  The  Church,  whereupon  "Hielari  Duncan" 
informed  his  fellow-traveller  that  he  was  on  his  way  to  Pitten- 


9GG  DIOCESE  OF  bT.  ANDREWS. 

weem  to  be  Ordained  Priest,  and  invited  him  to  accompany  him 
on  the  morrow,  which  he  did.  Bishop  Low  received  our  quondam 
Irish  Officer  very  complaisantly,  and  even  promised  to  Ordain 
him  forthwith ;  but  he  must,  in  the  first  place,  take  a  voyage 
to  Stornoway  :  he  was  nearly  drowned  on  the  way.  On  second 
thoughts,  the  Bishop  proposed  that  Alley  should  take  his  Degree 
at  Trinity  College,  Dublin  ;  but,  cognisant  that  he  had  no  chance 
of  success  there,  he  struck  out  for  Gicsscn,  and  paid  .£GO  for 
A.M.  and  Ph.  D.  On  coming  back  to  Pittenwcem,  in  the  Autumn, 
with  the  Deed  of  Honours,  Mr.  Alley  unfortunately  called  at  five 
o'clock,  when  the  Bishop  was  feeding.  "\Vhcn  his  Lordship's 
health  was  asked  for,  a  curt  rejoinder  was  made — "  Oh!  arc  you 
here  again  ?  I'm  very  poorly.  You'll  find  an  inn  in  Anstcr. 
Call  to-morrow.  Good  night  to  you."- -This  Act,  without  the 
Scenes,  is  lost :  I  only  witnessed  the  latter  half.  Before  I  was 
up  in  the  morning,  the  Bishop  sent  me  a  summons  of  immediate 
attendance,  when  I  was  asked — "What  for  are  you  harbouring 
that  fellow  here  ?  I'm  told  that  you  have  kept  him  all  night. 
Tell  him  that  you  and  I  are  not  bound  to  keep  up  house  for 
wayfarers.  However,  since  he  is  here,  you  can  bring  him  over." 

The  Bishop  denounced  the  produced  Diploma  for  Doctor  of 
Philosophy,  etc.,  as  an  imposture,  and  ordered  the  amateur 
Parson  about  his  business.  On  calming  down,  however,  Alley 
was  sent  as  a  Boarder  to  Carslogic,  the  residence  of  the  Eev.  G. 
G.  Milne,  of  Cupar,  where  he  was  schooled  for  a  twelvemonth. 
Bishop  Low  at  last  Ordained  him,  by  Deputation,  for  Blair- 
go  wrie,  where  he  got  into  debt  and  poverty,  being  necessitated 
latterly  to  dwell  and  sleep  in  his  Vestry.  He  quite  lost  casto 
with  the  "  Scotch  Office  Party,"  whose  chariot  wheels  then 
rolled  heavily.  He  cheated  me  out  of  several  pounds  on  his 
transit  to  the  Emerald  Isle,  and  the  last  rumour  of  him  was  that 
he  was  there  trying  the  art  of  "  Dominie"  in  a  Dame's  School. 

The  Congregation  at  Blairgowrie  petitioned  Bishop  Tony  to 
have  "  The  Scotch  Communion  Office"  discontinued,  and  to  have 
the  English  Office  instead,  but  were  refused ;  and  one  Sunday 
the  whole  of  the  people  went  out,  except  Miss  Elizabeth  Robert 
son,  when  a  Clergyman  proceeded,  on  commission,  to  Celebrate 


PATRICK  TORRY.  367 

according  to  the  "  Scottish  Use."    The  Congregation  gained  their 
Appeal,  from  the  Bishop's  inflexibility,  to  the  Episcopal  Synod. 

We  come  on  now  to  a  remarkable  incident  in  our  Bishop's 
Episcopal  life,  viz.,  Tlie  Appeal  of  Bishop  Luscomle  on,  Passice 
Communion. 

The  Rev.  William  Palmer,  Fellow  of  Magdalene  College,  Oxford,  and 
in  Deacon's  Orders,  had  been  for  some  time  anxious  to  re-establish  Com 
munion  between  the  Church  of  England  and  the  Church  in  Russia.  He  was 
residing  in  St.  Petersburg,  with  this  end  in  view,  and  he  found  among  other 
obstacles  which  prevented  his  being  admitted  to  Communion,  the  scandal 
arising  out  of  a  recent  occurrence  in  connexion  with  the  British  Chaplain  at 
Geneva.  Two  Russian  ladies,  a  mother  and  daughter,  had  been  admitted 
by  him  to  Communion,  as  Converts  from  their  own  Church.  Mr.  Palmer 
maintained  that  the  Chaplain  had  no  right  to  do  as  he  had  done,  and  ap 
pealed  to  the  then  Bishop  of  London,  under  whose  License  Mr.  Hare,  the 
Chaplain,  was  acting.  The  Bishop  maintained  that  it  was  no  concern  of  the 
Clergyman's  whether  the  ladies  came  as  Converts  or  not.  If  they  felt  them 
selves  impelled  by  conscientious  convictions  to  Communicate,  he  held  that 
no  one  had  a  right  to  interfere  with  them,  if  they  were  persons  of  good  life 
and  conversation.  This  was  ''Passive  Communion."  The  daughter  seems 
to  have  returned  to  her  pristine  Communion,  but  the  mother  found  her  way 
to  Paris,  and  placed  herself  in  connexion  with  Bishop  Luscombe.  The 
Bishop  being  accredited  by  the  Scottish  Bishops,  Mr.  Palmer  now  came  to 
this  Country  with  Letters  Commendatory  from  Bishop  Luscombe.  During 
the  negotiations,  Bishop  Luscombe  Died,  and  Mr.  Palmer  was  then  adopted 
by  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  who  alone  in  Scotland  was  favourable  to  his 
Appeal.  Mr.  Palmer  received  a  Formal  License  to  officiate  in  the  Diocese, 
pending  his  Appeal  to  the  Scottish  Church.  He  had  his  Appeal  Printed' — 
an  8vo  Volume  of  780  closely-printed  pages,  and  a  most  singular  evidence  of 
persevering  zeal  in  wearing  a  principle  down  to  exhaustion. 

Under  the  Incumbency  of  the  Rev.  George  Wood,  "  The 
English  Chapel"  (now  S.  John's  Church,  Perth),  in  January, 
1849,  after  having  been  about  90  years  in  a  state  of  Schism  from 
the  Church,  placed  itself  in  connexion  and  Communion  with  the 
Bishop  of  the  Diocese. 

In  December,  1850,  S.  Ninian's  Cathedral  (after,  as  a  matter 
of  course,  all  sorts  of  opposition)  was  duly  Consecrated.  Let 
the  Rev.  J.  M.  Neale,  D.D.,  tell  his  feelings  thereupon  :— 

It  was  just  about  sunset  on  a  fine  December  day  that  I  arrived  in  Perth. 
There  had  been  a  slight  fall  of  snow  011  the  Grampians,  and  the  stillness  of 
the  Fair  City,  and  the  setting  in  of  the  frost,  seemed  to  bring  out  in  greater 
relief  the  bustle  within  the  walls  of  the  Cathedral ;  and  the  glare  of  its  lights, 
as  the  workmen  were  hurrying  to  the  conclusion  of  their  task,  was  in  strange 
contrast  with  the  darkness  and  quietness  of  the  adjacent  street.  That  ni»ht 


8G8  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

I  shall  ever  remember  as  one  of  the  strangest  in  my  life.  Many  of  the  most 
necessary  arrangements  had  been  driven  off  till  the  very  last ;  the  carpenter's 
hammer  and  the  mason's  chisel  were  still  to  be  heard  ;  a  crowd  of  workmen 
were  yet  engaged  in  putting  the  finishing  touch  to  their  respective  depart 
ments  ;  the  frescoes  were  still  incomplete,  and  in  the  later  hours  of  the 
evening  the  Choir  was  practising  the  Chants  and  the  Hymns  for  the  next 
day.  An  English  reader  can  hardly  form  any  idea  of  the  interest  and 
curiosit}7  with  which  our  proceedings  were  regarded  by  Presbyterian  spec 
tators,  to  whom  the  whole  Ritual  of  the  Church  was  then  so  utterly 
unknown,  that,  as  I  remember,  the  leading  Perth  Newspaper  of  the  follow 
ing  week  gave  an  elaborate  description  to  its  readers  of  what  was  meant  by 
Chanting.  Perfect  silence  settled  down  over  the  City  ;  but  still  as  we  visited 
the  Cathedral  at  twelve,  at  two,  at  four,  and  at  six,  the  workmen  were  still 
engaged  in  their  various  occupations  ;  nor  was  it  till  the  late  morning  of  a 
Scottish  December  day  had  fairly  broken  that  everything  was  prepared  for  the 
approaching  Solemnity.  I  may  be  allowed  to  describe  the  Service  itself  as 
I  described  it  in  a  contemporary  Periodical. 

The  doors  of  the  Cathedral  were  open  at  10.30,  and  by  a  simple 
arrangement  the  members  of  the  Scotch  Church  were  separated  from  others, 
whom  curiosity  or  a  better  feeling  drew  to  the  Ceremonial.  In  the  mean 
time  the  Choir,  which  is  exceedingly  elevated,  was  gradually  filled  by  the 
Canons,  Clergy,  Lay-Vicars,  and  Choristers,  to  the  number  of  about  50  in 
all.  The  Bishop  of  Brechin,  who  officiated  for  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews, 
arrived  at  11.30,  and  was  met  at  the  Western  Door  by  the  whole  body  of 
Clergy,  by  whom  he  was  conducted  to  the  Altar.  The  usual  Formularies 
having  been  gone  through,  the  Procession  was  formed  in  the  following 
order: — Choristers,  Lay  Vicars,  Deacons,  English  Priests,  Scotch  Priests, 
Canons  of  S.  Ninian's,  Dean's  Verger,  Pro-Dean,  Bishop's  Verger,  Bishop, 
supported  by  his  Chaplains.  Proceeding  down  the  Nave,  and  round  the 
North  and  Soiith  Aisles,  they  returned  up  the  Nave,  and  such  was  the  length 
of  the  Procession,  that  the  foremost  Chorister  had  already  passed  the 
Chancel  Doors,  on  his  way  to  the  North  Aisle,  before  the  Bishop  had  reached 
the  West  Door.  At  that  moment  the  Precentor  intoned  "  The  earth  is  the 
Lord's,  and  all  that  therein  is  ;  "  and  the  Choir  thundered  out,  "  The  compass 
of  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein,"  with  the  rest  of  the  Psalm  (from 
Helmorc's  Pxftttcr  Xotctl,  as  were  all  the  Psalms).  The  Bishop,  having 
again  taken  his  place  at  the  Altar,  pronounced  the  usual  Prayers  of  Conse 
cration  :  that  for  the  Font  being  followed  by  the  Anthem,  "  If  ye  love  Me  ; " 
that  for  the  Pulpit  by  "  The  Lord  gave  the  word  ; "  and  that  for  the  Altar  by 
the  Hallelujah  Chorus.  The  Clergy  then  returned  into  the  Sacristy,  while 
the  doors  of  the  Church  being  thrown  open,  it  was  soon  crammed.  The 
Bishop  having  taken  his  seat  in  his  Throne,  Prayers  were  Sung  by  the  Piev. 
II.  F.  Humble,  Chanter ;  the  Lessons  Avere  read  by  the  Rev.  J.  Haskoll, 
Sacrist,  and  the  Piev.  J.  C.  Chambers,  the  Chancellor;  and  Litany  by  the 
Rev.  T.  Helmore  and  the  Rev.  A.  Wilson.  For  the  Anthem,  the  Hymn, 
AjHjitlaris  Fin»lto)H')itii)ii  (Hymnal  Noted). 

The  Holy  Communion  was  Celebrated  according  to  the  Scotch  Use, 
by  the  Bishop,  assisted  by  the  three  Canons,  as  Epistler,  Gospeller,  and 
Assistant  Priest.  After  the  Nicene  Creed,  Letters  Missive  were  read  from 
the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  by  which  he  erected  the  Collegiate  Church  of  S. 
Ninian  into  the  Cathedral  of  the  United  Diocese.  The  Sermon  was 


PATRICK  TOREY.  3G9 

Preached  by  the  Rev.  J.  M.  Neale,  Warden  of  Sackville  College,  from  S. 
Matthew  vi.  5,  the  Lord's  Prayer  having  been  appointed  for  the  subject  of 
the  Dedication  Sermons.  In  the  Evening,  the  Sermon  was  Preached  by  the 
Rev.  T.  Chamberlain.  On  Thursday,  during  the  Morning  Communion,  J. 
Comper  was  Ordained  Deacon.  The  Sermon  was  Preached  by  the  Rev.  E. 
B.  K.  Fortescue.  In  the  Evening  several  adults  were  Baptized ;  and 
several,  who  had  received  Presbyterian  Baptism,  were  admitted  into  the 
Church  according  to  the  Scottish  Form.  The  Converts  knelt  at  the  west 
door,  and  were  admitted  with  the  words — "  We  receive  this  person  into  the 
Congregation  of  Christ's  Flock,"  &c.  After  Prayer,  these,  with  several  of 
those  who  had  just  been  Baptized,  were  Confirmed  by  the  Bishop,  according 
to  the  Scottish  Form—"  I  Sign  tliec  with  the  Sign  of  the  Cross,  and  I  Lay 
mine  hands  upon  thee  in  the  Name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Amen.  Defend,  0  Lord,"  &c.  On  account  of  the  extreme 
length  of  the  Service,  which  was  not  over  till  ten  o'clock,  there  was  no 
Sermon.  On  Friday  morning,  after  Prayers,  the  Bishop  was  enthroned  (by 
Proxy)  and  the  Canons  were  Installed.  The  Rev.  C.  T.  Erskine,  of  Stone- 
haven,  represented  the  Bishop,  was  received  at  the  west  door  by  the  Canons, 
and  conducted  to  the  Altar,  where  Prayers  were  said  over  him,  and  thence 
to  the  Throne,  after  which  the  Tc  Dcum  was  sung.  The  Sermon  at  the 
Early  Communion  was  Preached  by  the  Rev.  C.  T.  Erskine,  that  at  the 
second  Celebration  by  the  Rev.  P.  Cheyne,  and  that  in  the  Evening  by  the 
Rev.  A.  Lendrum. 

When  Bishop  Tony  was  in  his  86th  year,  at  the  request  of 
seven  of  the  Clergy  of  his  Diocese— (the  Very  Rev.  John  lorry, 
his  son,  the  Rev.  John  Macmillan,  the  Rev.  Alexander  Lendrum, 
the  Rev.  Thomas  "Walker,  the  Rev.  John  Charles  Chambers,  the 
Rev.  Thomas  Wildman — all  Presbyters ;  and  the  Rev.  William 
Palmer,  Deacon) — he  gave  his  Imprimatur  to  an  Edition  of  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer,  which  purported  to  be  in  strict  confor 
mity  with  the  Usage  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  and  he  recom 
mended  it  to  the  use  of  the  Clergy  of  his  own  Diocese.  The 
Address,  Signed  by  these  "  Seven  Wise-acres  at  Mutkill,"  stated 
that  they  were  "  deeply  sensible  of  the  importance  of  having 
the  Liturgy  and  Usages  of  the  Church  in  Scotland,  for  the  last 
Century,  attested  by  a  Prelate  of  Bishop  Tony's  age  and  experi 
ence,  and  begged  to  express  their  desire  that  such  a  Book  might 
be  Edited,  under  his  sanction,  to  serve  as  a  Document  of  refer 
ence  and  authority,  in  regard  to  the  practice  of  our  Church." 
This  Volume  (Printed  in  1849  at  Edinburgh  by  R.  Lendrum  & 
Co.,  Hanover  Street)  was  Condemned  as  a  Fiction  by  the  Epis 
copal  College,  at  a  Synod  held  at  Aberdeen,  April  17-19,  1850 
— Bishop  Forbes  of  Brechin  alone  dissenting. 

VOL.  II.  8  A 


370  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Extract  ^Minute  of  Proceedings  of  tlie  Episcopal  College  at  their  recent  Synod 
(April  17-19,  1850)  at  Aberdeen. 

The  attention  of  the  Synod,  was  called  to  a  Prayer  Book  lately  Pub 
lished  and  Issued  by  Mr.  Lendrum  of  Edinburgh,  purporting  to  be  a  Prayer 
Book  according  to  the  Use  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  and  containing  many 
matters  which  are  neither  contained  in  any  parts  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  adopted  by  this  Church,  nor  adopted  by  any  General  Synod  as  the  use 
of  the  Church  of  Scotland :  to  which  Book  is  prefixed  a  Recommendation 
from  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  etc.,  to  the  Clergy  of  his  Diocese. 

The  Synod  Resolved — That  the  Publication  of  a  Book,  purporting  to  bo 
a  Prayer  Book  according  to  the  Use  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  Avithout  any 
sanction  from  a  General  Synod,  nor  even  from  an  Episcopal  Synod,  is  an 
instance  of  High  Presumption  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Lendrum  and  those  who 
have  employed  him ;  and  that  the  sanction  of  a  single  Bishop,  which  has 
been  obtained,  docs  not  extenuate  the  offence  of  which  Mr.  Lendrum  and 
his  employers  have  been  guilty.  The  Synod  directs  that  this  Resolution  be 
communicated  to  Mr.  Lendrum,  with  the  expression  of  the  earnest  hope,  and 
command  (so  far  as  its  command  can  legitimately  be  issued)  that  Mr.  Len 
drum  and  his  employers  take  all  possible  means  to  rccal  any  Copies  that 
have  been  issued,  and  to  suppress  the  remainder  of  the  Edition ;  and  the 
Synod  directs  that  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  &c.,  be  requested  to  withdraw 
his  Imprimatur.  w  j  ^^  ^^  of  G1  %  &c<> 

Clerk  to  the  Episcopal  Synod. 

Bishop  Torry  wrote  a  Memorial  to  his  "dear  Colleagues  in 
Christ,"  refusing  to  withdraw  the  Prayer  Book.  At  the  Autum 
nal  Episcopal  Synod,  held  5th  September,  1850,  the  Book  was 
again  Condemned,  and  a  Circular  sent  to  all  the  English  Bishops 
to  that  effect.  This  "  Mutliill  Prayer  Book"  still  continues  to  he 
used,  notwithstanding  Admonitions  and  Prohibitions.  In  July, 
1850,  Dr.  Torry  sanctioned  and  recommended  a  Collection  of 
127  Hymns  and  27  Anthems  for  the  use  of  his  Diocese,  which 
were  said  to  have  been  mainly  compiled  by  Robert  Campbell, 
Esq.  of  Skerrington,  Ayrshire.  These,  together  with  a  Calen 
dar,  wrere  marvellous  Reforms,  compared  to  Scotch  Uses  in  this 
respect  hitherto.  It  is  a  great  pity  that  those  who  got  up  this 
new  Prayer  Book  did  not  make  a  better  job  of  it  than  they  did, 
and  avail  themselves  of  the  Doctrinal  and  Eitual  Knowledge 
spread  abroad  so  extensively  during  the  last  half  score  years. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  call  attention  to  the  following 
Advertisement,  prefixed  to  "An  Historical  Catechism,  containing 
in  short  the  Sacred  History,  and  the  Doctrines  of  Christianity  as 
taught  in  the  Primitive  Church,  with  an  Explanation  of  the 


PATEICK  TOKKY.  371 

Festivals  and  Fasts.  Intended  for  the  use  of  the  Episcopal 
Church  of  Scotland.  Edinburgh  :  Printed  for  Drummond,  at 
Ossian's  Head.  MDCCLXXV."  Bishop  limes'  Catechism  is 
founded  upon  this.  I  have  never  seen  any  Copy  but  my  own,  and 
no  Catechism  ever  pleased  me  so  well  for  clear  Dogmatic  teaching. 

The  learned  Reader  will  perceive  that  the  following  Catechism  is 
perfectly  agreeable  to  the  Doctrine  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  as  explained  by 
the  ancient  Catholic  Church,  though  somewhat  different  from  the  Articles  in 
the  Common  Prayer  Book.  And  as  that  difference  may  surprise  many 
people  who  have  been  in  use  to  consider  the  Episcopal  Church  of  Scotland 
only  as  a  Branch  of  the  Church  of  England,  holding  all  her  particular 
Principles  and  Tenets,  therefore  the  Editors  think  it  proper  to  undeceive 
them  in  that  matter,  and  to  acquaint  such  as  are  ignorant  of  the  History  of 
their  own  Church,  that  she  always  has  been,  and  still  is,  a  Society  distinct 
from,  and  independent  upon  that  of  England ;  and,  therefore,  that  although 
she  honours  the  Church  of  England  as  a  Sister  Church,  she  never  did 
homologate  her  Articles,  nor  require  them  to  be  Subscribed  by  any  of  her 
Members,  either  Laity  or  Clergy.  And  farther,  that  although  our  Governors 
found  it  convenient  to  connive  at  the  introduction  of  the  English  Liturgy 
into  this  Country,  yet,  by  no  Law  or  Canon,  have  they  ever  tied  themselves 
or  their  Clergy  to  the  use  of  it,  however  excellent  a  composition  it  may  be  ; 
that  it  is  upon  the  main  the  best  Collection  of  Public  Devotions  extant, 
must  be  acknowledged ;  but  it  had  been  still  more  perfect,  because  more 
agreeable  to  primitive  Christianity,  had  the  Communion  Office  been 
permitted  to  remain  as  it  was  first  Reformed.  And  it  is  a  pity  that  by  the 
junction  of  it  and  the  Morning  Prayer  and  Lit  any,  the  Lord's  Prayer  and 
Doxology  should  be  so  frequently  repeated ;  and  that  there  should  be  two 
Creeds,"two  Blessings,  and  frequently  two  Confessions,  and  two  Absolutions 
at  one  Diet  of  Worship ;  because  these  are  evidently  imperfections,  which, 
with  some  other  Improprieties  in  the  choice  of  Lessons,  &c.,  stand  in  need 
of  being  corrected,  and,  it  is  hoped,  will  receive  proper  alterations  soon. 

All  the  faults  and  deficiencies  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer 
"according  to  the  Use  of  the  United  Church  of  England  and 
Ireland,"  which  are  at  the  present  day  so  loudly  complained 
against,  as  not  according  to  such  Use,  are,  in  the  "  Muthill  Prayer 
Book,"  perpetuated  in  redundancy,  even  to  the  caution,  "A  Man 
may  not  Marry  his  Grandmother ; "  and  a  number  of  traditionary 
Seotcli  Uses  are  entirely  omitted.  One  remarkable  Use  and  Wont 
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  as  occasion  required,  is  unnoticed, 
viz.,  The  Office  for  Absolving  Fornicators.  I  have  witnessed 
repeatedly,  in  a  Chapel  where  Scotch  Uses  were  rigidly  adhered 
to,  this  impressive  Form,  or  "Cutty  Stool  Office,"  which  I 
possess.  The  door  was  carefully  snibbed  during  the  time  of 


372  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDBEWS. 

Absolution,  which  was  always  given  with  Imposition  of  Hands ; 
and  the  Delinquent,  for  the  time  being,  stationed  on  the  Stool  of 
Repentance,  was  termed  "Houghmygandy" 

Tony's  Book  was  to  serve  as  an  Authoritative  Document  of 
reference  in  regard  to  the  Uses  and  bygone  Practices  of  the 
Scotch  Episcopal  Church.  It  foils  throughout  in  such  preten 
sions,  and  contradicts  the  Editor  in  his  Letter  to  Lord  Forbes, 
Dated  August,  1847,  where  he  exhibits  what  a  Skeleton  of 
Divinity  the  Scotch  Episcopal  Church  was,  even  in  his  own 
reminiscences.  With  the  utmost  reluctance  he  himself  gave  up 
the  use  of  the  Black  Gown,  worn  throughout  the  entire  Service, 
even  when  he  had  been  presented  with  a  Surplice  ;  and  yet  King 
Edward  VI. 's  Rubric  stands  in  the  forefront  of  his  Prayer  Book, 
implying  that  "such  Ornaments  of  the  Church,  and  of  the 
Ministers  thereof,  at  all  times  of  their  Ministration,  were  retained 
and  in  use  in  the  Episcopal  Church  of  Scotland  from  the  days  of 
the  second  year  of  that  Monarch's  Reign."  The  Rubrics  prefixed 
to  the  Forms  of  Marriage,  Burial  of  the  Dead,  Ordination  of  the 
Clergy,  &c.,  are  not  correct  exponents  of  the  Uses  of  the  Scotch 
Church.  And,  to  give  out,  as  a  Document  of  Reference  and 
Authority,  that  the  Use  of  said  Church  was  to  Sing  the  Psalter 
Pointed,  is  indeed  an  old  wife's  fable.  Alas  !  the  Scotch  Episco 
pal  Church  had  great  ado  to  sing  even  Tait  and  Brady.  Another 
omission  is — no  reference  to  the  general  Use  of  Tokens.  It  was 
ill  done  of  those  who  planned  this  Prayer  Book  to  wheedle  the 
good  Patriarch,  set.  8G,  to  endorse  such  a  would-be  Catholic 
Miscellany. 

For  the  "Scottish  Communion  Office"  he  may  almost  be 
said  to  have  lived  for  the  last  20  years  of  his  life.  His  Letters, 
his  occasional  Papers,  all  bear  witness  that  this  was  the  subject 
uppermost  in  his  thoughts. 

The  concluding  portion  of  the  life  of  the  Bishop  is  given  by 
his  son,  Dean  Torry,  who,  extraordinary  to  relate,  Signed  the 
Petition  for  his  father's  Book  of  Usages,  and  afterwards  recanted. 

After  his  visit  to  Crieff,  in  1847,  lie  did  not  leave  his  home  for  any  long 
journey  ;  but  he  continued  to  enjoy  good  health  to  the  end  of  his  career  with 
very  little  interruption ;  and  he  retained  his  powers  of  locomotion  and  com- 


PATEICK  TOEBY.  373 

parative  activity,  until  his  last  illness,  which  seized  him  ten  days  before  his 
Death.  About  twelve  months  before  that  happened,  and  when  he  had 
nearly  completed  his  88th  year,  such  was  his  remaining  vigour,  that  he  paid 
his  annual  visit  to  his  near  relations,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ellies,  at  Buthlaw, 
several  miles  from  Peterhead,  and  spent  the  day  in  lively  conversation  Avith 
them.  To  the  very  last  he  was  blessed  with  a  sound  mind,  and  kept  up  his 
habits  of  mental  activity  and  regularity.  Although  living  in  a  kind  of 
seclusion  for  several  years  before  his  Death,  time  never  seemed  to  hang 
heavy  on  his  hands.  He  often  refreshed  his  memory  with  the  Works  of 
Ken,  Hickes,  Collier,  Brett,  and  others,  Authors  on  whom  he  ever  looked  as 
models  of  Catholicity  in  their  principles. 

In  his  concluding  years,  and  until  it  was  interrupted  by  his  last  illness, 
his  usual  mode  of  spending  the  day  may  be  given  as  follows  : — After  break 
fast,  at  nine  o'clock,  he  read  a  part  of  the  Greek  New  Testament,  and  then 
a  portion  of  the  Works  of  some  of  his  favourite  Authors,  three  of  which  may 
be  said  to  have  been  his  daily  companions — viz.,  "  Eouth's  Reliquiae  Sacra:," 
"Jones'  Life  of  Bishop  Home,"  and  "Williams'  Gospel  Narrative  of  our 
Lord's  Passion  and  Eesurrection."  When  his  reading  was  over,  he  devoted 
a  great  part  of  the  remainder  of  the  day  to  Epistolary  Correspondence, 
chiefly  on  the  business  of  his  Diocese,  and  to  other  writing,  being  very 
particular  in  making  with  his  own  hand  Copies  of  all  his  business-Letters. 
It  may  be  mentioned  as  a  proof  of  his  industry  in  this  respect,  that  he 
Copied  over  in  his  latter  years,  in  a  fair  hand  (for  which  he  was  remarkable 
to  the  last),  various  Sermons,  both  of  his  own  and  of  others ;  and  a  4to 
volume  remains,  into  which  he  had  Copied,  after  he  was  8-4  years  of  age, 
many  particular  Letters  to  various  of  his  Correspondents. 

Ten  days  he  lay  on  the  bed  of  sickness,  occasionally  distressed  with  a 
painful  and  weakening  disease,  but  for  the  most  part  with  intervals  of  ease, 
in  which,  no  longer  occupying  his  mind  with  worldly  concerns,  he  was 
evidently,  when  awake,  rapt  in  heavenly  meditation.  At  length,  in  his  89th 
year,  on  the  morning  of  Sunday,  the  3d  of  October,  1852,  surrounded  by  all 
the  living  members  of  his  family,  without  a  groan  or  sigh,  his  spirit  returned 
to  God  who  gave  it. 

At  the  earnest  solicitation  of  the  Provost  and  Canons  of 
Perth,  it  was  agreed  by  his  family  that  his  remains  should  be 
interred  in  that  Cathedral.  They  were  removed  from  Peterhead 
to  Aberdeen  on  the  12th  of  October,  were  received  in  that  City 
by  the  Primus  and  by  some  of  the  Clergy,  and  by  them  escorted 
to  the  Southern  Eailway.  At  the  Perth  Station,  the  Canons  and 
others  of  the  Cathedral  body  were  in  waiting  ;  the  Choristers  and 
Vergers  preceded  the  Hearse  to  S.  Ninian's,  and  the  Coffin  was 
deposited  in  the  Nave  under  a  Canopy  of  black  cloth,  emblazoned 
with  the  Arms  of  the  Three  Sees.  The  Provost  of  the  Cathedral, 
having  laid  on  it  the  Pastoral  Staff  and  the  Mitre,  took  his  place 
at  the  head,  and  every  three  hours  the  various  Watchers,  all  of 
them  connected  with  the  Cathedral,  were  relieved.  The  inhabi- 


374  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDEEWS. 

tants  of  the  Town  were  admitted  about  nine  o'clock,  passed 
round  the  Coffin,  and  went  out  by  the  same  door  at  which  they 
had  entered.  It  was  very  late  before  all  that  wished  had  visited 
the  scene  ;  the  doors  were  then  closed,  and  the  rest  of  the  Watch 
was  kept  by  the  Cathedral  Clergy  alone. 

On  the  following  day  the  Funeral  took  place.  The  Pall  was 
borne  by  the  Warden  of  Trinity  College  and  seven  other  Clergy 
of  the  Dioceses.  The  Bishops  of  Brechin  and  Moray  were  in 
attendance,  and  by  the  former  the  Service  itself  was  performed. 
The  Psalms  and  Anthems  were  Chanted  by  the  Choir,  by  whom 
also,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Solemnity,  the  Dies  Inc,  from  the 
Hymnal  Noted,  was  sung. 

The  Bishop  was  Buried  on  the  North  Side  of  the  Choir,  and, 
as  the  ancient  custom  was,  facing  the  West.  The  Funeral  Sermon 
was  Preached  by  the  Rev.  J.  B.  Pratt,  Incumbent  of  Cruden. 


IMPORTANT  ADDENDA. 

The  following  Emendations  have  arrived  in  time.  They  are 
specimens  of  how  three  Doctors  differ.  I  was  indebted  to  Dr. 
Rorison  of  Peterhead  for  telling  me  that  Bishop  Torry  was  Born 
at  "Pennan,"  and  also  for  its  Topographical  Description,  and 
for  the  Smuggling  propensities  of  its  denizens. 

.  .  .  .  I  liavc  just  gone  over  the  Sketch  of  the  Life  of  Bishop 
Torry  in  your  Scoticlu-nnicon,  where  there  are  some  things  which,  I  am  sure, 
when  pointed  out,  you  will  see  the  necessity  of  correcting.  You  say  that 
he  was  born  at  Pennan,  in  the  Parish  of  King  Edward.  Pennan  is  not  in 
the  Parish  of  King  Edward ;  nor  was  the  Bishop  horn  there,  hut  at  Gar- 
neston,  where  you  state  that  his  father  was  "  a  Weaver  at  the  \Yauk-Mill." 
His  father  was  not  a  Weaver,  hut  a  Dyer  or  Litster — a  grade  considerably 
above  that  of  a  common  Weaver,  and  requiring  in  those  days  especially, 
when  the  science  was  less  studied,  a  practical  knowledge  of  Chemistry. 

You  mention  also  that  "  the  Cottages  in  the  fishing  Hamlet  of  Pennan, 
are  perched  like  nests  high  up  on  the  steep  rocks."  Here  again  you  are 
wrong.  The  Village  of  Pennan  is  built  along  the  law  of  the  Cliff,  it  being 
not  an  unusual  thing,  at  very  high  tides,  to  have  the  houses  flooded  to  the 
depth  of  a  foot  or  two. 

The  place  where  the  accident  happened  to  the  Bishop's  family,  was  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  Old  Kirk  of  Aberdour,  about  two  miles 
East  from  Pennan.  It  was  occasioned,  not  by  a  fall  of  the  rocks,  but  by  a 
land-slip,  the  marks  of  which  may  still  be  seen ;  and  the  little  Mill-lead  yet 


PATEICK  TOKKY.  375 

remains  which  Thomas  Torry  conducted  from  the  Dour,  along  the  face  of 
the  Brae,  to  turn  the  wheel  of  the  Wauk-Mill  which  he  erected  at  that  place. 

There  is,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  land-slip,  the  vestiges  of 
which  may  still  he  seen,  a  sort  of  hut,  embedded  in  the  clay  slope  ;  so  that 
one  might  really  pass  by  it  without  observing  it,  the  door  being  shaded  by  a 
sort  of  bramble,  and  only  the  front,  or  little  more,  visible.  Some  years  ago, 
Dean  Torry  and  I,  with  others,  visited  this  locality,  when  we  found,  to  our 
surprise,  the  hut  inhabited  by  an  old  man,  a  sort  of  hermit.  Whether  he  is 
now  alive  I  know  not,  but  he  was  an  intelligent  carl ;  or  whether  his  hut 
forms  any  part  of  the  house  occupied  by  the  Tonys,  I  do  not  think  that  we 
asked,  or  if  we  did  I  have  forgotten. 

I  feel  sure  you  will  excuse  the  liberty  I  have  taken  in  pointing  out  these 
things  to  you.  .  .  .  JOHN  B.  PRATT. 

St.  James's,  Crudcn,  April  80,  18G8. 


.  .  .  .  Neither  Dr.  Pratt  nor  Dr.  Eorison  has  given  you  correct 
information  of  my  father's  Birth-place,  or,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  of  my  grand 
father's  occupation.  What  I  have  of  my  father's  place  of  Nativity  is  unde 
niable,  being  testified  by  an  Extract  from  the  Baptismal  Eegister  of  the 
Parish  of  King  Edward,  as  it  was  given  by  the  Eegistrar  to  my  late  cousin, 
Dr.  Torry,  in  Aberdeen;  and  what  I  am  to  send  you  of  his  ancestors,  &c., 
was  taken  from  his  own  mouth  at  Peterhead  in  1848,  when  I  was  at  a  visit 
to  him.  The  Extract  is  as  follows  : — 

"  January  1st,  17G4. — Thomas  Torry,  in  Waukniill  of  Garneston,  and 
Jean  Watson,  his  spouse,  had  a  son  Baptized  named  Peter.  Witnesses, 
Peter  Torry  in  the  Craig  of  Garneston,  and  Peter  Torry  in  the  Waukmill  of 
Strathairy. 

"Extracted  from  the  Eegister  of  Baptisms  at  King  Edward,  this  18th 
day  of  October,  1848,  by  "JAMES  STEINSON,  Sess.  Clk." 

[The  Bishop's  name  was  Peter  then,  not  Patrick.] 

Now,  this  corresponds  in  Date  with  what  my  father  always  told  me,  that 
he  was  Born  in  the  Parish  of  King  Edward  on  the  27th  Dec.,  17C3,  as  I  have 
stated  in  his  "  Life,"  etc.  This  place,  Garneston,  is  many  miles  away  from 
Pennan,  and  also  from  Dr.  Pratt's  supposed  place  of  Birth  [Accident',  near 
the  Auld  Kirk  of  Aberdour.  This  is  evident  to  any  one  who  will  consult 
Thomson's  Maps  of  the  Parishes  of  Scotland,  a  Book  in  my  possession, 
where  the  place  Garneston  is  marked ;  and  also  Balmaud,  not  far  from  it, 
where  my  father's  mother  was  Born,  Jicr  father  being  Farmer  at  Mains  of 
Balmaud.  It  also  corresponds  with  what  my  father  told  me,  that  when  a 
grown  up  boy  he  used  to  walk  five  miles  daily  to  a  School  at  Cumineston, 
that  place  being  distant  from  Garneston  about  five  miles,  as  you  may  also 
see  by  the  said  Map.  It  may  be  that  my  grandfather  had  eventually  gone 
to  the  Parish  of  Aberdour,  where  is  the  place,  as  alleged  by  Dr.  Pratt,  of  his 
mother's  and  a  younger  brother's  sudden  death ;  but  that  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  place  of  his  Birth,  and  it  is  plain  that  his  father  had  not  left  Gar 
neston  till  the  son  (my  father)  was  a  grown  up  lad,  able  to  walk  five  miles  a 
day  to  School  and  five  back,  and  therefore  capable  of  remembering  what  his 
father's  occupation  was,  as  in  the  information  given  by  him  to  me,  rim  roce, 
and  which  I  took  down  at  the  time,  and  send  you  a  Copy  of. 


376  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDKEWS. 

It  may  be  that  "  Tullochgorum "  is  right  in  his  Poem  about  the 
"  humble  cot"  iu  which  my  grandmother  is  said  to  have  met  her  death,  as 
pathetically  described  by  that  true  Poet ;  but  that  has  nothing  to  do,  as  I 
have  said,  with  the  Home  in  which  the  Bishop  was  Born ;  and  the  removal 
could  not  have  taken  place  for  some  years  after  his  Birth,  as  he  continued 
during  his  boyhood  at  his  father's  house  at  Garneston,  first  under  the  tuition 
of  his  uncle,  and  then  attending  the  School  at  Cumineston. 

The  following  information  was  taken  down  by  me  as  related  to  me  by 
my  father  at  Peterhead,  in  September  18-48  : — 

"  William  Torry  was  a  farmer  at  Drakesmires,  in  the  parish  of  King 
Edward,  about  the  beginning  of  the  last  Century.  He  kept  a  greyhound, 
and  was  fond  of  sporting.  He  had  by  his  wife  five  sons — Alexander,  James, 
Peter,  George,  and  Thomas,  the  youngest,  who  was  my  father.  Several  of 
my  uncles  were  manufacturers  and  dyers  in  Elgin.  James,  the  second  son, 
was  a  zealous  Jacobite,  and  followed  Prince  Charles  Edward  in  17-15  as  a 
volunteer  with  Sir  Charles  limes  of  Coxton,  in  Lord  Pitsligo's  Regiment  of 
Horse.  After  the  failure  of  that  expedition,  he  was  obliged  to  skulk,  and  I 
have  been  often  in  the  Cave,  on  the  banks  of  the  Garneston,  where  he  used 
to  hide,  and  where  his  mother  secretly  carried  food  to  him.  After  the  Act 
of  Indemnity,  he  returned  to  Elgin  for  the  purpose  of  following  his  former 
occupation  ;  but  not  meeting  with  encoxiragement  in  consequence  of  his 
political  principles,  he  returned  to  his  native  Parish  of  King  Edward,  and 
took  up  a  School  at  a  place  called  the  Craig  of  Garneston.  He  was  a  man 
of  piety  and  considerable  scholarship,  and  I  was  for  some  years  his  pupil. 
During  that  time  I  have  repeatedly  listened  at  his  chamber  door,  in  the 
intervals  of  teaching,  and  heard  him  reading  aloud  the  Prayers  of  the  Church. 
He  was  a  man  of  fine  appearance,  and  when  dressed  out  in  his  black  clothes, 
three-cocked  hat,  and  large  bushy  wig,  he  looked  more  like  a  dignified 
Bishop  than  many  who  have  actually  held  that  Office. 

"  The  fifth  son,  Thomas,  my  father,  was  Born,  as  far  as  I  can  discover, 
about  1728.  He  was  settled  as  a  Manufacturer  and  Dyer  at  the  Wank  Mill 
of  Garneston,  on  a  stream  of  that  name,  where  he  had  a  small  Farm,  on  the 
property  of  the  Earl  of  Fife.  He  married  Jane,  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Watson, 
a  Farmer  at  Mains  of  Balmaud,  in  the  same  Parish,  a  man  of  considerable 
substance,  who  was  able  to  settle  his  three  eldest  sons — George,  Alexander, 
and  William — in  Farms.  James,  his  youngest  son,  was  at  first  Teacher  of 
the  Parish  School  of  Selkirk,  and  afterwards  Picctor  of  the  Grammar  School 
of  Haddington,  and  was  father  of  John  Watson,  Writer  to  the  Signet  in 
Edinburgh ;  and  Alexander,  the  present  Minister  of  Leuchars,  in  Fife.  I 
was  assistant  to  my  uncle  for  about  a  year;  and  then,  at  the  age  of  18,  I 
went  North,  and  was  for  a  time  Teacher  of  the  Parish  School  of  Lonmay,  in 
Aberdeenshire." 

So  far  my  father's  narrative  to  me.  In  reference  to  his  grandfather, 
William  Torry,  I  find  the  following  Extract  from  the  Baptismal  Kegister  of 
King  Edward,  already  referred  to  : — 

"July  19th,  1717.— William  Torry,  in  Drakesmires,  had  a  son  Bap 
tized  named  Peter.  John  Duncan  and  Peter  Sangster,  both  in  Yonder 
Garneston,  witnesses." 

The  mother's  name  is  not  given,  which  I  see  is  the  case  in  regard  to 
various  other  Baptisms  of  the  time. 


CHARLES  WORDSWORTH. 


877 


Since  writing  the  above,  in  looking  over  my  cousin  Dr.  Terry's  Papers, 
I  have  found  the  following  Inscription  of  a  Grave-stone  in  the  Church-yard 
of  King  Edward,  which  fixes  the  time  of  my  grandmother's  death  : — 

"  This  Stone  is  erected  by  Thomas  Terry ,  at  Waukmill  of  Auchmedden, 
in  memory  of  his  wife,  Jean  Watson,  and  sou,  Alexander  Tony,  who  both 
Died  March  8th,  1784.  The  mother  was  aged  58,  and  the  son  23  years." 

Now,  as  my  father  was  Born  the  end  of  1763,  this  shows  that  he  was 
somewhat  above  20  years  old  when  his  mother  and  elder  brother  were  killed. 
St.  Anne's,  May  21,  1868.  J.  TORRY. 


LXI.  CHARLES  WORDSWORTH,  D.C.L.,  Oxon.,  A.D.  1853, 

Is  the  second  son  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Christopher  Wordsworth, 
sometime  Dean  of  Booking,  Rector  of  Lambeth,  and  afterwards 
Master  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge.  His  mother 
was  Priscilla,  a  daughter  of 
Charles  Lloyd,  Esq.  of  Bing- 
ley  House,  Birmingham. 
The  Family  of  Wordsworth 
came  from  Penistone,  in 
Yorkshire,  and  can  be  traced 
back  to  the  end  of  the  four 
teenth  Century.  Our  Pre 
late  was  Born  at  Lambeth 
in  180G,  and  was  Baptized 
in  the  Private  Chapel  of 
Lambeth  Palace — the  then 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
Charles  Manners  Button, 
after  whom  he  was  named, 
being  one  of  his  godfathers  ; 
the  other  was  his  uncle,  the 

Poet.  He  Was  educated  at  Crest,  a  Mitre  supported  by  two  Pastoral 
HaiTOW  School  Under  Dr  Staffs,  crosse(l  behind  the  Shield  ;  on  the  dexter 

side,  a  St.  Andrews  Cross,  the  Arms  of  the  See  ; 

treorge  Butler,  and  from  on  the  sinister,  Three  Church  Bells,  the  Arms 
thence  proceeded  to  Christ  of  the  Wordsworth  Family;  motto,  "Veritas." 
Church,  Oxford,  where  he  graduated  in  the  year  1830,  obtaining  a 

VOL.  II.  3  B 


878  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

first-class  in  litcris  humanioribus.  He  had  previously  successfully 
competed  for  the  Latin  Verse  Prize  in  1827 ;  and  in  reward  for 
this  distinction  the  Dean  gave  him  a  Studentship.  He  also  gained 
the  Latin  Prize  Essay  in  1831.  After  taking  his  B.A.  Degree,  he 
remained  at  Oxford  for  two  or  three  years,  as  a  private  Tutor, 
during  which  time  he  reckoned  among  his  Pupils  the  late  Duke 
of  Newcastle,  Mr.  (now  the  Eight  Hon.)  W.  E.  Gladstone,  Mr. 
W.  K.  Hamilton  (now  Bishop  of  Salisbury),  Mr.  H.  E.  (now 
Archbishop)  Manning,  and  Mr.  James  Hope  (now  Hope- Scott  of 
Abbotsford).  It  will  be  seen  afterwards  that  his  early  intimacy 
with  two  of  these  was  the  occasion  of  his  coming  to  live  in 
Scotland. 

He  was  also  well  known  during  his  School  and  College  career 
as  a  successful  Competitor  in  Athletics,  attaining  to  unique  distinc 
tion  both  in  the  cricket  field  and  on  the  river.  One  of  the  Eleven 
in  the  first  (1827),  and  also  in  the  sccoml  (1829)  Cricket  Match 
played  between  the  two  English  Universities,  he  rowed,  moreover, 
as  one  of  the  E icjht  in  the  first  Boat  Race  (also  in  1829),  pulling 
against  the  now  Bishops  Selwyn  and  Tyrrell ;  so  that  he  took 
part  in  both  encounters,  which  fell  not  only  in  the  same  year  but 
in  the  same  week — the  Boat  Race  being  on  Wednesday  and  the 
Cricket  Match  on  Friday.  On  all  three  occasions  he  was  vic 
torious. 

Mr.  Wordsworth  was  Ordained  Deacon  by  the  Bishop  of 
Oxford  in  1834,  and  was  content  to  remain  in  the  Diaconate  till 
1840,  when  he  was  Ordained  Priest  by  the  Bishop  of  Winchester. 

He  continued  to  hold  a  Studentship  in  his  College  until  his 
Marriage  in  1835  with  Miss  Charlotte  Day,  eldest  daughter  of  the 
Rev.  George  Day.  She  Died  in  1839,  leaving  an  only  daughter. 
The  Latin  distich  which  he  composed  as  an  Inscription  for  her 
Monument  has  been  much  admired  :— 

I,  nimium  dilecta,  vocat  Dens  ;  I,  bona  nostra? 
Pars  animse  :  moerens  altera,  disce  sequi. 

Lord  Derby,  among  several  others,  has  attempted  a  Trans 
lation  of  it  into  English  Verse,  which  appeared  in  the  London 
Guardian  for  May  1,  1867.  It  is  as  follows  :— 


CHAELES  WOEDS  WORTH.  379 

Too  dearly  loved,  thy  God  hath  called  thee  ;  Go, 
Go,  thoti  best  portion  of  this  widowed  heart : 

And  thou,  poor  remnant,  lingering  here  in  woe, 
So  learn  to  follow  as  no  more  to  part. 

On  the  second  Mastership  of  Winchester  College  becoming 
vacant  in  1835,  he  was  chosen  to  succeed  to  that  Office,  which 
he  continued  to  fill  for  ten  years  with  great  credit  and  success- 
being  the  first  instance  of  one  Elected  as  a  Master  on  that 
Ancient  Foundation  who  had  not  been  educated  at  the  School. 
Those  who  wish  to  see  more  fully  his  method  of  treating  his 
Foundation  Scholars  at  Winchester,  would  do  well  to  consult  his 
"Christian  Boyhood  at  a  Public  School,"  2  Vols.  8vo,  1846. 
In  this  latter  year  he  also  Published  "  The  College  of  S.  Mary, 
Winton,  near  Winchester,"  Illustrated,  small  4to.  He  had  pre 
viously  become  known  as  a  Preacher  and  Divine  by  a  Sermon  on 
"Evangelical  Repentance,"  which  he  delivered  in  Winchester 
Cathedral,  in  aid  of  the  two  great  Church  Societies  (S.  P.  C.  K. 
and  S.  P.  G.),  on  November  llth,  1841 ;  and  which  was  Pub 
lished  (by  request)  with  a  Dedication  to  the  Warden  of  Winches 
ter.  The  Sermon  attracted  a  good  deal  of  attention  at  the  time, 
as  it  advocated  the  restoration  of  Primitive  Discipline,  according  to 
the  express  wish  of  the  Church  in  the  Commination  Office.  It 
was  followed  by  a  large  "Appendix"  of  authorities,  both  ancient 
and  Anglican. 

Mr.  Wordsworth's  reputation  as  a  Greek  Scholar  was  con 
firmed  by  the  attempt  which  he  commenced  in  1839  to  put  an 
end  to  the  confusion  then  caused  by  the  use  of  various  Grammars 
in  the  different  English  Public  and  Private  Schools.  His  "  Grsecse 
Grammatics  Rudimenta  in  usum  Scholarum,"  which  first  ap 
peared  in  that  year,  and  is  Published  by  the  Oxford  Clarendon 
Press,  has  now  reached  the  Seventeenth  Edition,  having  super 
seded  almost  every  other  Work  of  that  kind  in  England.  A 
full  account  of  the  labour  and  difficulty  he  had  to  encounter  in 
accomplishing  this  task,  and  of  the  principles  upon  which  it  was 
executed,  may  be  seen  in  a  Pamphlet  which  he  recently  Printed, 
on  the  occasion  of  his  Grammar  having  been  formally  accepted 
by  the  Head  Masters  of  the  nine  principal  Public  Schools.  It  is 


380  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDBEWS. 

entitled  "  The  School  Greek  Grammar.  A  Letter  to  the  Kev. 
Dr.  Moberly,  Head-Master  of  Winchester  College.  Edinburgh  : 
1806." 

The  zeal  with  which  Mr.  Wordsworth  devoted  himself  to  his 
scholastic  duties  proved  injurious  to  his  health ;  so  much  so  that 
in  the  Autumn  of  1845  he  was  compelled  to  withdraw  from  his 
post  at  Winchester,  and  seek  the  benefit  of  rest  and  sea  air  at 
Brighton.  His  father,  who  then  resided  in  that  neighbourhood 
upon  his  living  at  Buxtecl,  and  was  himself  in  declining  strength 
(he  Died  on  the  2nd  of  the  following  February),  was  averse  to 
his  returning ;  and  the  consequence  was  that  he  withstood  the 
earnest  solicitations  of  the  Warden  and  Head  Master,  and 
resigned  his  Office  as  Second  Master  (worth  more  than  £1400 
a-year,  with  a  suitable  residence)  at  the  Christmas  of  that  year. 

After  his  father's  death,  he  returned  to  Winchester  for  the 
sake  of  the  society  of  old  friends,  and  was  living  there  privately 
in  a  hired  house,  when,  on  the  morning  of  Whitsun  Eve,  1846, 
he  received  unexpectedly  a  Letter  from  Mr.  W.  E.  Gladstone, 
then  in  office  under  Sir  R.  Peel,  to  say  that  he  was  coming  to 
see  him  that  night,  on  important  business,  and  to  stay  with  him 
the  next  day.  The  "important  business"  turned  out  to  be  a 
request  on  Mr.  Gladstone's  part  that  Mr.  Wordsworth  would 
accept  the  Office  of  Warden  of  Trinity  College,  which  was  then 
being  raised  near  Perth,  in  Scotland,  upon  the  banks  of  the 
Almond.  It  was  urged  that  his  past  career,  especially  his 
experience  of  the  system  of  English  Public  Schools,  would  be 
likely  to  prove  of  the  greatest  assistance  to  the  new  Institution. 
Mr.  Wordsworth  objected,  that  he  was  "  a  broken  down  horse," 
quite  unfit  for  the  labour  and  anxiety  of  such  an  undertaking. 
To  this  it  was  replied  that  he  might  have  a  year  to  recruit,  as 
the  College  Buildings  were  not  sufficiently  advanced  to  admit  of 
its  being  opened  till  the  following  Spring.  In  point  of  emolu 
ment,  the  proposed  Office  was  not  to  equal,  by  less  than  one-half, 
the  value  of  that  which  he  had  resigned  a  few  months  before  ; 
but  when  he  found  that  Trinity  College  had  been  mainly  set  on 
foot  by  two  of  his  old  Oxford  friends  and  pupils — Mr.  W.  E. 
Gladstone  and  Mr.  James  Hope — for  purposes  in  which  he 


CHAELES  WOBDSWOBTH.  381 

entirely  sympathised,  all  his  scruples  and  objections  gave  way, 
and  lie  consented  to  allow  his  name  to  be  submitted  to  the  College 
of  Bishops  for  appointment  to  the  Wardenship.  There  is  reason 
to  believe  that  he  felt  bitter  disappointment  when,  shortly  after, 
the  latter  of  these  friends  joined  the  Church  of  Home  ;  and  the 
former  began  to  deviate  from  the  Political,  or  rather  Politico- 
Ecclesiastical,  Principles  which  they  had  once  held  in  common. 

In  confirmation  of  the  foregoing  Narrative,  it  may  be  added 
that,  at  a  dinner  given  in  Edinburgh,  on  September  28th,  1853, 
to  the  Seven  Bishops  and  the  Clergy  of  the  Church,  by  Lay  Mem 
bers  of  the  Church  Society,  Sir  Archibald  Edmonstone,  in  pro 
posing  the  toast  of  Trinity  College,  and  speaking  of  the  Warden, 
then  become  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  stated  that  Mr.  Gladstone 
once  said  to  him  —  "  The  best  day's  work  I  ever  did,  was  when  I 
went  down  to  Winchester  and  persuaded  Wordsworth  to  come 
into  Scotland  as  our  first  Warden  of  Glenalmond."  The  name 
Glenalmond  was  given  to  the  College  by  Mr.  Wordsworth,  who 
was  greatly  taken  by  its  poetical  sound. 

In  token  of  the  general  esteem  in  which  Mr.  Wrordsworth  had 
been  held  at  Winchester,  it  is  due  to  mention  that,  when  he 
resigned  the  Second  Mastership,  the  Boys  presented  him  with  a 
splendidly  bound  Copy  of  "  Dugdale's  Monasticon,  1846,"  as 
one  whom  his  Scholars  had  found  "per  decem  annos  blandum, 
simplicem,  et  in  alumnos  animi  paterni  notissimum."  His 
former  Pupils  subscribed  to  place  in  the  College  Ante-Chapel  a 
beautiful  Window  of  stained  glass,  by  Wailes,  "  as  a  tribute  of 
gratitude"  to  his  memory;  which,  besides  the  initials  "  (£.  Sit./' 
bears,  under  suitable  emblematic  figures,  in  the  four  lower  com 
partments,  the  following  Inscription  :— 


—  (itatedicsi  —  per  Confitmattottem 
ab  Sanxtam  (Eudvanstiam  —  et  ab  cmnia 
(telestia,  $astott  ^ttagister,  memote*  gratosqu* 
bisdpulos  buccbal 

After  Baptism  —  by  Catechising  —  through  Confirmation  —  to  the 
Holy  Eucharist  —  and  to  all  heavenly  things,  he  was  wont,  as  a 
Spiritual  Pastor  and  Master,  to  lead  his  Disciples,  who  thus  express 
their  Eememhrance  and  Gratitude. 


382  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

Moreover,  from  the  Assistant  Masters  (8  in  number)  he  received, 
"in  amicitise  et  observantise  testimonium,"  a  valuable  collection 
of  Theological  Volumes  of  several  kinds ;  while,  by  the  request 
and  at  the  expense  of  the  Head  Master,  his  Portrait,  painted  by 
G.  Richmond,  has  since  occupied  the  place  of  honour  over  the 
Chimney-piece  in  Dr.  Moberly's  Library  ;  and  Copies  of  the 
same  were  to  be  seen  similarly  distinguished  in  the  houses  both 
of  the  Warden  and  of  Mr.  Wickham,  who  succeeded  Mr.  Words 
worth  as  Second  Master. 

In  reference  to  the  word  "Catechesi"  in  the  Inscription 
mentioned  above,  it  may  be  added  here  that  an  Educational 
benefit  similar  to  that  which  he  had  rendered  by  his  "  Greek 
Grammar,"  but  still  more  important,  he  hoped  to  perform,  for 
boys  of  the  Upper  and  Middle  Classes,  by  the  publication  of  his 
"  Catechesis,  or  Christian  Instruction,  preparatory  to  Confirma 
tion  and  First  Communion,"  which  first  appeared  in  1842.  It  is 
now  in  the  Fifth  Edition ;  and,  besides  being  used  in  Schools,  is 
required  as  a  Text  Book  for  Deacons'  Orders  by  some  of  the 
English  Bishops. 

In  the  Autumn  of  1846,  while  still  residing  at  Winchester, 
Mr.  Wordsworth  married  his  second  wife,  Katharine  Mary,  eldest 
daughter  of  the  Rev.  W.  B.  Barter,  and  niece  of  the  late  Warden 
of  Winchester ;  after  which  he  set  out  with  his  Bride  for  Italy, 
wrhere  he  spent  the  following  Winter  and  Spring.  By  this  lady, 
who  is  still  living,  he  has  a  numerous  family. 

Meanwhile  his  Nomination  to  the  Wardenship  by  Mr.  Glad 
stone  having  been  ratified  by  the  Episcopal  College,  he  came 
down  to  Scotland,  in  order  to  be  present  at  the  Laying  of  the 
first  Stone  of  the  College  Chapel  by  Sir  John  Gladstone  on 
September  8,  1846.  On  that  occasion  he  delivered,  as  Warden, 
an  Inaugural  Address,  which  was  afterwards  Printed  by  desire  of 
the  three  Bishops  present,  viz.,  Bishop  W.  Skinner  of  Aberdeen 
(Primus),  Bishop  Russell  of  Glasgow,  and  Bishop  Moir  of 
Brechin.  At  the  Public  Dinner  after  the  Ceremony,  the  follow 
ing  Latin  Epigram,  in  the  style  of  Monkish  Verse,  was  recited 
by  Bishop  Russell  as  the  Warden's  Composition,  who  also 
supplied  an  English  Translation.  Sir  John  Gladstone  had  just 


CHARLES  WORDSWORTH.  883 

before  been  made  a  Baronet,  and  was  a  munificent  contributor  to 
the  College  Buildings. 

Mactus  honore  novo,  proprio  cognomine  laatus, 
Fuudamenta  domus  Virque  Lapisque  jacit. 

Quern  L^TUS-LAPIS  ipse  jacit,  lapis,  omine  laetus, 
Stet,  stet  in  sternum,  mactus  honore  novo  ! 

In  honours  new  for  high  deserts  arrayed, 
GLADSTONE,  auspicious  name,  this  Basement  laid. 
Glad  stone,  laid  here  by  Gladstone's  bounteous  hand, 
Blest  still  with  honours  new,  for  ever — ever — stand  ! 

It  was  not  till  more  than  three  years  afterwards  that  the  Chapel 
was  completed  and  ready  for  Consecration.  The  Architect's 
estimate  of  £5000  for  the  Building  ultimately  rose  to  ,£8500 ; 
and  the  Warden,  who  had  given  the  former  sum  in  order  that  it 
might  be  applied  for  this  purpose,  subsequently  increased  his 
donation  by  £3500,  rather  than  allow  any  portion  of  the  cost  to 
fall  upon  the  Funds  of  the  College.  The  College  was  opened  for 
the  Junior  Department  on  May  4,  1847 ;  but  more  than  another 
year  elapsed  before  it  was  sufficiently  advanced  to  receive 
Theological  Students.  Some  "Lines  on  the  Fourth  of  May,  the 
Anniversary  of  the  Opening  of  Trinity  College,  Glenalmond," 
composed  by  the  Warden,  after  the  manner  of  Burns,  may  be  seen 
(without  his  name)  in  the  S.  E.  Journal  for  May,  1852,  p.  108. 

In  August,  1847,  the  Chapel  which  had  been  built  by  Sir 
John  Gladstone  on  his  Estate  at  Fasque,  was  Consecrated  by  the 
Primus,  Bishop  W.  Skinner  of  Aberdeen.  Two  Sermons  Preached 
on  the  occasion — one  by  the  Bishop  of  Oxford  (S.  Wilberforce), 
and  the  other  by  Mr.  Wordsworth — were  Published  by  desire  and 
at  the  expense  of  Mr.  Gladstone.  Later  in  the  same  year,  on  the 
Festival  of  S.  Simon  and  S.  Jucle,  the  Warden  also  Preached  the 
Sermon  when  Mr.  A.  Ewing  and  Mr.  A.  P.  Forbes  were  Con 
secrated  together  to  the  Episcopal  Office  in  S.  Andrew's,  Aberdeen 
—the  former  as  Bishop  of  Argyle  and  the  Isles,  the  latter  as 
Bishop  of  Brechin. 

It  was  the  express  and  urgent  wish  of  Bishop  Tony,  in  whose 
Diocese  Trinity  College  was  situated,  that  Mr.  Wordsworth 
should  receive  Institution  as  a  Presbyter  of  the  Diocese,  in  order 


884  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDEEWS. 

that  he  might  assist  at  the  proceedings  of  the  Annual  Diocesan 
Synod,  which  the  Bishop  himself,  in  consequence  of  his  advanced 
age,  had  now  ceased  to  attend.  He  was  thus  drawn  to  take  a 
more  active  part  in  Church  matters  than  was  perhaps  desirable 
for  one  in  his  position,  especially  at  a  time  when  party  spirit  was 
strong,  and  anxious  matters  were  continually  coming  up.  Of 
this  kind  was  one  then  well  known  by  the  name  of  ''Deacon 
Palmer's  Appeal,"  made  "to  the  Scottish  Bishops  and  Clergy, 
and  generally  to  the  Church  of  their  Communion."  It  was  upon 
the  great  question  of  7VW/v  <>r  Xon-Pd^irc  Communion.  Bishop 
Torry  recommended  the  whole  matter,  as  embraced  in  the  closely- 
printed  thick  Volume  published  by  Mr.  Palmer,  to  the  considera 
tion  of  his  Synod ;  and  when  they  met  to  discuss  the  question, 
Mr.  Wordsworth  read  an  Address,  ending  with  four  Resolutions, 
all  of  which  the  Synod  adopted  unanimously;  and  at  the  same 
time  thanking  him  for  his  Address,  ordered  it  to  be  Printed,  and 
Copies  to  be  forwarded  to  the  other  Synods  of  the  Church.  It 
should  be  stated  that  the  case  out  of  which  the  Appeal  arose  had 
reference  to  the  Russian  Church.  The  principal  Resolution 
was  to  this  effect : — "  That  we,  the  Members  of  this  Diocesan 
Synod,  for  ourselves,  for  our  own  branch  of  the  Church,  and  for 
the  branches  also  with  which  we  arc  in  Communion,  do  solemnly 
disavow  and  repudiate  the  position,  that  no  person  can  be  right 
fully  prevented  from  taking  the  Communion  in  our  Churches, 
provided  only  he  profess  himself  to  be  a  member  of  the  same." 

Mr.  Wordsworth  followed  up  his  Synodical  Resolutions  with 
"A  Letter  to  the  Primus"  (Printed  for  private  circulation),  en 
forcing  his  views  with  special  application  to  the  divided  state  of 
Scotland.  These  early  efforts  indicated  the  deep  sense  which  he 
already  entertained  of  the  evil  of  separation.  Mr.  Palmer,  who 
is  a  man  of  great  ability  and  indomitable  perseverance,  had  been 
an  Oxford  friend  of  the  Warden's,  and  though  they  differed 
materially  upon  some  points,  the  Warden  was  evidently  anxious 
to  support  his  cause  as  far  as  he  conscientiously  could.  He  has 
since  separated  from  the  Church  of  England,  and,  after  showing 
for  some  time  a  strong  inclination  towards  the  Eastern  Church, 
is  now  a  member  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 


CHARLES  WORDSWORTH.  885 

In  1850,  when  occasion  was  unhappily  given  for  Controversy 
by  what  was  called  "Bishop  Torry's  Prayer  Book,"  Mr.  Words 
worth,  though  he  always  entertained  the  greatest  respect  for  the 
Bishop  himself,  was  one  of  those  who  did  not  consider  it  compe 
tent  for  a  single  Diocesan,  without  the  cognizance  or  concurrence 
of  his  Episcopal  Brethren,  to  set  forth  and  recommend  to  the  use 
of  his  Clergy,  an  Edition  of  "  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer," 
purporting  to  be  "according  to  the  Use  of  the  Church  of  Scot 
land,"  but,  in  fact,  differing  in  several  important  particulars  from 
any  that  had  been  before  Published.  Consequently,  when  the 
Synod  of  St.  Andrews'  Diocese  met  at  the  end  of  June,  he 
thought  it  his  duty  to  support  the  authority  of  the  Episcopal 
Synod  in  their  censure  of  that  step ;  and  when  an  adverse  Report 
of  the  proceedings  of  the  Diocesan  Synod  had  appeared  in  the 
London  Guardian,  he  defended  himself  and  the  majority  of  the 
Presbyters,  including  the  Dean  and  Synod- Clerk,  who  had  voted 
with  him,  in  a  scries  of  Letters  to  the  Editor  of  the  same 
Journal  (afterwards  collected  and  Published  under  the  title  of 
"Seven  Letters  to  the  Guardian"},  and  also  in  a  Pamphlet 
addressed  to  Bishop  Tony  himself.  By  the  arrangement  which 
the  College  of  Bishops  had  then  made  for  Trinity  College,  the 
Warden  was  required  to  use  the  Scotch  and  English  Communion 
Offices  on  alternate  Sundays ;  and  he  considered  himself  placed 
in  an  awkward  and  unfair  position  by  his  Diocesan's  Recom 
mendation  of  a  Prayer  Book  which  omitted  the  English  Office. 
His  principal  opponent  in  this  Controversy  was  the  Rev.  Or.  H. 
Forbes  of  Burntisland,  who,  it  was  believed,  had  assisted  in  the 
preparation  of  the  Bishop's  Book. 

It  was  natural  that  the  Warden  of  Glenalmond  should  feel  an 
especial  interest  in  the  state  of  the  Church  in  Perth.  The  Con 
gregation  of  S.  John's,  which  for  nearly  half  a  Century  had  been 
in  a  state  of  separation  from  the  Bishop,  was  received  back  into 
Communion  by  the  Dean,  the  Very  Piev.  J.  Tony,  acting  for  his 
father,  on  January  25th,  1849 — a  happy  result,  earnestly  desired 
for  many  years  by  Bishop  Tony,  who  had  addressed  an  affec 
tionate  appeal  to  the  Separatists ;  and  when  that  was  not  properly 
responded  to,  had  recently  sent  the  Rev.  J.  C.  Chambers,  who, 

VOL.   II.  3  C 


380  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

by  his  assiduous  and  devoted  Ministry,  especially  among  the 
poor,  succeeded  in  establishing  a  new  Mission.  Both  Congrega 
tions  being  in  want  of  a  suitable  Place  of  Worship,  they  were 
intending  to  build  at  the  same  time  ;  or  rather,  in  the  case  of  the 
Mission,  it  was  proposed  that  Lord  Forbes'  scheme— to  constitute 
a  Cathedral  at  Perth — just  then  suggested,  should  be  adapted  to 
receive  it.  Mr.  Wordsworth  was  of  opinion  that  it  would  con 
tribute  greatly  to  the  consolidation  and  eventual  increase  of  the 
Church  in  Perth  if  both  schemes  could  be  combined.  With  this 
view  he  Published,  anonymously,  "A  Call  to  Union;  respectfully 
addressed  to  the  Members  of  the  two  Episcopal  Congregations  in 
Perth,  1850."  It  may  be  questioned  whether  the  combination 
which  he  recommended  was  practicable  under  the  circumstances  ; 
but  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the  Church  might  have  been 
developed  in  Perth,  as  it  has  been  at  Dundee,  far  more  rapidly 
and  effectually  out  of  one  large,  united  Congregation  (having 
Daily  Service  and  Weekly  Communion,  as  the  Warden  recom 
mended)  than  out  of  two  stunted  and  partially  discordant  bodies. 
As  generally  happens  in  such  cases,  the  "Call"  met  with  a 
favourable  response  from  neither  party.  Mr.  Wordsworth,  how 
ever,  proved  his  interest  and  impartiality  in  the  matter  by 
contributing  largely  and  equally  to  both  undertakings,  which 
resulted  in  the  new  and  very  insufficient  Church  of  S.  John's ; 
and  in  the  new,  and  as  yet  imperfect,  Cathedral  of  S.  Ninian's. 

In  the  same  year,  Mr.  Wordsworth  exerted  himself  by  preach 
ing  in  various  Churches  throughout  the  Country,  on  occasion  of 
the  Offertory  which  had  been  directed  by  the  Episcopal  Synod  to 
be  made  on  behalf  of  Trinity  College.  One  of  the  Sermons  which 
he  delivered  for  that  purpose  (from  Ps.  cxiii.  9)  was  Published, 
by  request,  and  dedicated  "to  the  Seven  Bishops  of  the  Church 
in  Scotland." 

The  following  year,  1851,  was  in  several  respects  an  eventful 
one.  It  witnessed  the  first  appearance  of  The  Scottish  Ecclesi 
astical  Journal — a  Publication  suggested  and  planned  by  Mr. 
Wordsworth,  and,  with  large  assistance  from  him,  ably  and 
successfully  Edited  for  some  years  by  Mr.  Walker  of  Bowland. 
The  Consecration  of  the  College  Chapel  took  place  on  May  1,  S. 


GHABLES  WORDSWOKTH.  387 

Philip's  and  S.  James'  Day;  and  the  Morning  Service  having  been 
preached  by  Dean  Ramsay,  the  Warden,  preaching  at  the  Second 
Service,  took  occasion  to  allude — as  he  had  also  done  in  his  Fasque 
Sermon,  but  speaking  now  more  openly — to  the  fears  which  he 
entertained  of  a  tendency  towards  separation  of  Church  and 
State ;  having  reason  to  suspect  the  change  which  had  begun, 
and  is  now  being  plainly  developed,  upon  that  subject,  in  the 
mind  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  who  was  present  on  both  occasions. 
The  Sermon,  under  the  title,  "  The  Church,  Home,  and  School," 
may  be  seen  in  the  #.  E.  Journal  for  May.  These  occurrences, 
however,  did  not  put  a  stop  to  friendly  relations  between  the 
Warden  and  that  distinguished  Statesman,  who,  at  the  request 
of  the  former,  contributed  to  the  July  Number  of  the  Journal  the 
Review  of  "Memoirs  of  William  Wordsworth,  Poet  Laureate," 
p.  151.  How  much  the  mind  of  Mr.  Wordsworth  was  running 
at  that  time  upon  the  great  Politico-Ecclesiastical  question  just 
referred  to  may  bo  further  discovered  not  only  from  several 
Articles  which  he  contributed  to  the  early  Numbers  of  the  S.  E. 
Journal,  but  from  an  elaborate  Sermon  which  he  delivered  hi  the 
Autumn  of  the  same  year,  at  Kidderminster,  on  occasion  of  the 
Jubilee  of  the  S.  P.  G.,  and  which  his  friend  the  Vicar  (the 
Rev.  T.  L.  Claughton,  now  Bishop  of  Rochester)  requested  to 
be  allowed  to  Publish  at  his  own  expense.  It  was  entitled 
"National  Christianity  an  Article  of  the  Christian  Faith."  An 
eminent  High  Church  Layman  attacked  the  doctrine  of  the 
discourse  in  the  columns  of  the  Morning  Chronicle ;  but  from  the 
Votes  which  the  same  Gentleman  has  lately  given,  and  the 
Speeches  which  he  has  made,  in  Parliament,  it  may  be  inferred 
that  he  has  since  seen  cause  to  change  his  opinion. 

In  January,  1852,  Mr  W.  E.  Gladstone,  then  M.P.  for  the 
University  of  Oxford,  Published  his  "  Letter  to  the  Right  Rev. 
W.  Skinner,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Aberdeen  and  Primus,  on  the 
Functions  of  Laymen  in  the  Church,"  the  primary  and  avowed 
object  of  which  was  to  urge  the  admission  of  Laymen  as  Con 
stituent  Members  of  Ecclesiastical  Synods.  This  Letter  was 
thought  by  Mr.  Wordsworth  to  give  public  evidence  of  what  the 
writer's  mind  must  eventually  come  to  in  regard  to  the  severance 


388  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDEEWS. 

of  Church  and  State.  Ho  therefore  lost  no  time  in  giving  the 
needful  warning  against  what  he  considered  a  very  dangerous 
position ;  and  in  the  following  month  (February,  1852)  appeared 
his  "  Letter  to  the  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  on  the  Doctrine 
of  Religious  Liberty,  as  propounded  in  his  Letter  to  the  Bishop 
of  Aberdeen  and  Primus."  In  this  Pamphlet,  which  was  allowed 
by  one  of  its  severest  critics  and  impugners  to  be  "a  masterly 
performance,"  there  were  remarks  made  which  now  appear  as 
though  they  did 

"Attain 
To  something  like  prophetic  strain." 

But  lli en.  there  were  not  many  who  saw  the  matter  in  the  same 
light.  There  were,  however,  some.  Among  these  may  be  named 
the  loved  and  revered  Isaac  Williams,  and  the  then  Dean  of 
Christ  Church,  the  celebrated  Greek  Professor,  Dr.  Gaisford ; 
the  latter  of  whom  wrote  to  Mr.  Wordsworth  as  follows: — "I 
take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  you  for  a  Copy  of  your  Letter 
to  Mr.  Gladstone,  u'licrcin  you  have  proved  to  nuj  satisfaction  that 
(his  Gentleman  is  unfit  to  represent  the  University."  Mr.  Gladstone 
kindly  acknowledged  the  courteous  manner  in  which  Mr.  Words 
worth  had  conducted  the  personal  part  of  the  Controversy ;  but 
the  strictures  upon  the  principle  at  stake  were  felt,  it  is  believed, 
to  be  of  some  weight,  and  Mr.  Gladstone's  Pamphlet,  though 
soon  out  of  Print,  was  never  Republishcd.  A  second  Edition  of 
Mr.  Wordsworth's  Letter  was  issued,  though  not  by  himself, 
later  in  the  year,  and  widely  circulated  for  Electioneering 
purposes.  It  was  not  till  more  than  thirteen  years  afterwards, 
viz.,  in  July,  1805,  that  a  majority  of  the  Electors  for  the  Uni 
versity  of  Oxford  came  to  the  same  conclusion  which  Dean  Gais 
ford  had  arrived  at  so  long  before. 

In  June  Mr.  Wordsworth  again  took  up  his  pen,  and  prepared 
an  Address  upon  the  more  immediate  subject  of  Mr.  Gladstone's 
Publication,  when  that  matter  came  for  Discussion  before  the 
Diocesan  Synod.  The  Address  was  Published,  by  request  of  the 
Synod,  in  a  Pamphlet  entitled  "Lay-Membership  in  Church 
Synods  considered  with  reference  to  the  Constitution  of  the 
Church  in  Scotland."  Its  arguments  appeared  to  give  general 


CHARLES  WORDSWORTH.  389 

satisfaction,  and  by  tending  to  mould  the  decisions  of  the  other 
Diocesan  Synods,  had  the  effect  of  quashing  all  further  agitation 
of  the  question  for  some  years. 

Four  months  later  in  the  same  year,  viz..  on  October  o, 
Bishop  Tony  Died.  He  had  always  looked  upon  the  Warden 
as  his  probable  Successor ;  but  this  was  not  to  come  to  pass 
without  difficulty  from  causes  which  must  now  be  touched  upon. 
During  the  whole  of  his  Episcopate,  Bishop  lorry  had  been 
obliged  to  reside  at  a  distance  from  his  Diocese,  being  Incumbent 
at  the  same  time  of  Peterhead,  North  of  Aberdeen ;  and  during 
the  latter  years  of  his  life  he  was  unable  even  to  attend  the 
Meetings  of  his  Diocesan  Synod.  These  circumstances  were 
unfortunate,  both  in  other  respects  and  because  they  had  given 
rise  to  the  upgrowth  of  a  more  than  usual  amount  of  party  spirit, 
and  to  the  formation  of  opposing  cliques  among  the  small  body 
of  his  Clergy,  then  amounting  to  16  only.  This  state  of  things 
had  caused  the  Election  of  a  Successor  to  be  looked  forward  to 
with  more  than  ordinary  interest  and  anxiety,  not  only  in  the 
Diocese  but  throughout  the  Church.  Mr.  Wordsworth  had 
previously  shown  no  desire  for  the  post,  as  was  proved  by  the 
fact  (which  came  out  in  evidence  before  the  Bishops  upon  the 
subsequent  "Appeal")  that  when,  some  months  before  Bishop 
Torry's  death,  he  had  been  applied  to  by  the  Senior,  and  one  of 
the  most  respected,  of  the  Presbyters  (the  Rev.  J.  C.  Lyon  of  St. 
Andrews),  to  allow  himself  to  be  brought  forward  when  the 
Vacancy,  which  could  not  be  long  distant,  should  arise — upon 
the  plea  that  the  opposite  party  among  the  Clergy  would  be  sure 
to  be  ready  with  their  Candidate — he  sent  no  answer  to  the  com 
munication.  Afterwards,  when  the  Vacancy  had  occurred,  he 
received  a  similar  application  from  the  Dean  of  the  Diocese,  the 
son  of  the  late  Bishop,  and  with  this  he  complied ;  contrary  to  the 
wish  of  his  friends  in  England,  who  were  greatly  averse  to  his 
settling  himself  in  this  country.  When  the  day  of  Election  (Nov. 
10)  came  on,  the  Votes  being  8  and  8,  it  was  manifest  that  if 
any  settlement  was  to  be  arrived  at,  Mr.  Wordsworth,  being  the 
17th  Voter,  must  be  placed  in  the  dilemma  either  of  allowing  the 
8  Clergy  whose  Candidate  he  was  to  be  defeated  in  his  person 


yj()  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

by  Voting  for  his  opponent  (who  had,  moreover,  recently  become 
Bishop  of  another  Diocese),  or  by  giving  his  Vote  in  his  own 
favour,  as  they  had  requested  him  to  do.  The  Warden  (who  was 
not  a  man  to  allow  any  cause  in  which  he  was  engaged,  and  about 
which  many  others,  he  knew,  felt  even  more  keenly  than  he  did 
himself,  to  be  worsted,  if  he  could  lawfully  help  it)  adopted  the 
latter  course.  At  the  same  time,  he  announced  that  he  should 
request  the  College  of  Bishops  to  cancel  his  Vote  if  the}*  disapproved 
of  the  step  he  had  taken,  and  he  wrote  to  the  Primus  to  that  effect. 
The  next  day,  however,  wishing  to  give  the  adverse  Clergy  an 
opportunity  of  reconsidering  their  position,  he  declined  to  accept 
the  Election  as  it  then  stood.  Accordingly  a  Mandate  was  issued 
for  a  new7  Election  to  take  place  on  November  30,  S.  Andrew's 
Day.  In  the  interval  a  remarkable — not  to  say  providential- 
circumstance  occurred  which  put  the  matter  in  a  new  light. 
The  Warden's  brother,  the  Learned  Canon  (now  Archdeacon)  of 
Westminster,  in  the  course  of  an  investigation  relating  to  the 
affairs  of  the  Abbey  Chapter,  was  led  to  notice  a  provision  of  the 
Canon  Law,  by  which  it  is  ruled  that  in  case  of  a  Capitular 
Election,  where  one  of  the  Candidates  is  a  member  of  the  Elec 
tive  Body  and  the  other  is  not,  if  the  Votes  arc  equal  the  former 
is,  //).so  Jaf(o,  to  have  the  preference,  provided  he  agree  to  the 
Election,  without  giving  his  own  Vote — a  solution  which,  with 
obvious  justice,  precisely  met  the  existing  difficulty  in  the  St. 
Andrews  Diocese.  And,  further,  it  appeared  that  this  principle 
had  been  accepted  by  authorities  in  England  since  the  Refor 
mation  as  part  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Law.  When  the  day  of 
Election  came  on  a  second  time,  the  antagonist  party  so  far 
relaxed  in  their  determination  that  they  offered  to  elect  Mr. 
Wordsworth  unanimously,  provided  he  would  promise  at  once  to 
resign  the  Wardenship — thus  acknowledging  that  their  opposition 
was  not  founded  upon  any  supposed  moral  or  intellectual  dis 
qualification.  To  this  proposal  he  did  not  feel  himself  at  liberty 
to  give  consent,  but  only  replied  that  if  he  found,  upon  experi 
ence,  the  duties  of  the  twro  Offices  incompatible,  he  would  do  as 
desired.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  College  Council,  most 
of  whom  were  anxious  for  his  Election,  had  come  to  a  Resolution 


CHARLES  WORDSWORTH.  391 

just  before,  ''that  the  Office  of  Warden  is  compatible  with  that 
of  Bishop,  and  that  this  opinion  be  placed  on  record  in  their 
Minutes."  The  answer  of  Mr.  Wordsworth  not  being  deemed 
satisfactory,  another  Candidate  was  named,  and  the  Voting  pro 
ceeded — only  to  arrive  at  the  same  result  as  before.  An  Appeal 
was  taken  to  the  College  of  Bishops,  who,  after  full  hearing, 
unanimously  rejected  it ;  and  having  before  them  an  opinion  of 
Mr.  (now  Sir)  Eoundell  Palmer  to  the  effect  that  the  Canon  Law 
was  clearly  and  unquestionably  in  Mr.  Wordsworth's  favour,  con 
firmed  his  Election.  The  two  principal  Appellants  were  the 
Rev.  A.  Lendrum  (who  was  then  at  Crieff,  but  has  now  left 
Scotland),  and  the  llcv.  G.  H.  Forbes. 

It  is  undesirable  to  enter  further  into  the  peculiarities  of  this 
case,  for  fear  of  disturbing  feelings  which,  it  is  hoped,  have  been 
long  dormant,  never  to  be  re-awakened.  In  this  Country  the 
merits  of  the  contest  were  generally  appreciated,  especially  by  the 
Laity,  from  whom  Mr.  Wordsworth  received  a  very  cordial 
Address — an  unprecedented  mark  of  confidence  and  respect. 
Even  in  England  it  was  understood,  for  the  most  part,  what  the 
nature  of  the  circumstances  really  was.  For  instance,  from  Dr. 
Rotith,  the  venerable  President  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford, 
who  was  then  in  his  09th  year,  and  who  had  always  taken  a 
remarkably  strong  and  intelligent  interest  in  our  Church,  the 
Warden,  though  personally  unknown  to  him,  received  a  Letter 
of  congratulation,  "only  regretting  that  it  was  not  the  Arcli- 
bishopric  of  St.  Andrews  to  which  he  had  been  Elected."  Even 
Dr.  Neale,  though  a  great  admirer -of  Bishop  Tony,  and  though 
he  differed  from  Mr.  Wordsworth  upon  some  points,  spoke  of  the 
Diocese  of  St.  Andrews  as  one  "which  was  so  fortunate  in  its 
late  Prelate,  and  certainly  not  less  so  in  his  Successor."  [Preface, 
to  Life,  of  Bishop  Torn/,  p.  riii.[ 

The  Consecration  took  place  on  the  F.  of  the  Conversion  of 
S.  Paul  (January  25th,  1853),  at  Aberdeen,  the  Primus  being 
assisted  by  the  Bishops  of  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow. 

It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  the  Revised  Code  of  Canons 
of  18G3  provides  for  the  first  time  "that  no  Clergyman  shall 
Vote  for  his  own  Election."  But  it  is  also  provided,  for  the  first 


392  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

time,  by  the  same  Code,  that  "if  any  question  shall  arise  as  to 
the  interpretation  of  the  Canons  or  of  any  part  thereof,  the 
general  principles  of  Canon  Law  shall  be  alone  deemed  applicable 
thereto"-— a  Provision  which  would  have  secured  Mr.  Words 
worth's  Election  without  his  own  Vote.  The  former  Clause, 
however,  of  the  new  Canons  gave  alarm  to  his  delicacy  of  feeling, 
and  when  it  came  on  for  discussion  he  not  only  withdrew  alto 
gether  from  the  General  Synod,  but  resolved  at  once  to  offer  the 
Resignation  of  his  Bishopric.  Whereupon  respectful  Addresses 
and  Letters,  from  the  Primus,  in  the  name  of  his  Episcopal 
Brethren,  and  from  his  own  Clergy  (including  every  one  of  those 
still  in  the  Diocese  who  had  opposed  his  Election)  and  Laity, 
flowed  in,  deprecating  any  such  course.  The  result,  and  a  fuller 
Account  both  of  these  particulars  and  of  those  which  attended 
the  Election  itself,  may  be  read  in  a  Printed  Letter  which  the 
Bishop  addressed  "  To  the  Very  Picv.  J.  Tony,  Dean  of  the 
Diocese  of  St.  Andrews,"  under  Date  February  10,  18G3. 

The  first  business  of  importance  to  which  the  new  Bishop 
was  called  to  give  his  attention,  was  the  position  of  the  Church 
and  Clergy  of  S.  Ninian's,  Perth ;  concerning  which,  though  it 
had  now  been  Consecrated  and  in  full  use  for  more  than  two 
years,  and  claimed  to  be  the  Cathedral  of  the  United  Diocese,  no 
authoritative  communication  had  yet  been  made  to  the  Presbyters 
either  in  or  out  of  Synod.  For  this  purpose  a  Special  Diocesan 
Synod  was  called  by  the  Bishop,  and  held  at  Trinity  College  on 
April  G.  Some  idea  of  the  difficulties  which  Mr.  Wordsworth 
had  to  encounter  in  the  first  instance  from  the  party  action  which 
had  existed  among  the  Clergy,  may  be  conceived  when  it  is  stated 
that  every  one  of  those  who  had  supported  him  at  his  Election, 
concurred  in  resisting  the  attempts  which  he  now  made  to  adopt 
and  place  the  Cathedral  on  a  proper  basis  ;  while  he  was  sup 
ported  by  every  one  of  those  who  had  before  opposed  him ! 
Thus,  the  Votes  being  equal,  nothing  could  be  then  determined. 
He  himself  announced,  in  the  Sermon  preached  on  that  occasion 
(and  afterwards  Published,  with  the  Report  of  the  Proceedings  of 
the  Special  Synod),  the  principle  upon  which  he  desired  to  act  in 
his  administration  of  the  Diocese,  viz.,  so  as  to  have  regard  not  to 


CHAELES  WOEDS WORTH.  393 

this  or  that  part  only,  but  to  the  whole  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Body. 
Eventually  he  succeeded  in  making  the  Cathedral  Scheme  accep 
table  to  all ;  and  the  new  "  Code  of  Statutes,"  carefully  prepared 
by  him  with  that  view  (the  original  Constitution  having  been 
objected  to  not  only  in  the  Diocese  but  by  the  Episcopal  College), 
were  unanimously  adopted  at  the  ordinary  annual  Synod,  held 
also  at  Glenalmond  on  July  6th.  So  far  the  issue  of  the  Bishop's 
exertions  had  been  prosperous.  It  was  not  long,  however,  before 
it  began  to  be  perceived  that  the  Diocese  was  not  yet  prepared 
for  a  style  of  Ritual,  &c.,  so  advanced  as  that  of  the  Cathedral  was 
designed  to  be,  especially  in  a  Church  which  had  also  to  discharge 
the  duties  of  a  new  Mission.  Happily,  however,  the  Bishop  had 
insisted  upon  securing  from  the  principal  Founders — Lord  Forbes 
and  the  Eight  Hon.  G-.  F.  Boyle — an  Endowment  (of  JC 200  per 
annum)  for  the  Provost,  and  (of  .£100  per  annum)  for  one  Canon 
—previously  there  had  been  no  Endowment  at  all ; — and  thus 
the  Institution,  though  still  insufficiently  supported  and  waiting 
for  better  days,  cannot  fail,  it  is  hoped,  to  be  completed  in  God's 
good  time,  and  so  to  stand  as  long  as  the  world  shall  last.  The 
Bishop  was  enthroned  in  the  Cathedral  with  due  solemnity  on  S. 
Matthew's  Day  (September  21),  and  Preached  the  Sermon,  after 
wards  Published,  on  "  S.  Matthew  an  Example  for  the  Church  in 
Scotland." 

Previously  to  this,  and  within  a  few  months  after  his  Election, 
Mr.  Wordsworth  received  a  very  honourable  and  gratifying  com 
pliment  from  the  University  of  Oxford.  At  the  Grand  Com 
memoration,  on  June  5th,  when  the  Earl  of  Derby  was  installed 
as  Chancellor  of  the  University,  our  Bishop  was  admitted,  with 
several  other  persons  of  high  distinction  (including  Mr.  D 'Israeli), 
to  the  degree  of  D.C.L.,  "  honoris  causa,"  and  his  name  was 
greeted  with  marked  applause  in  the  Theatre.  When  the  cheer 
ing  arose,  Sir  Robert  Phillimore,  in  the  usual  Latin  Speech, 
presenting  the  Candidate  to  the  Chancellor,  happily  remarked 
(in  reference  to  the  Prize  Exercises  which  "  Charles  Wordsworth" 
had  gained,  and  recited  in  the  same  place,  as  a  young  man)  that 
"he  seemed  to  be  at  home  where  he  now  stood, 
Plausuque  sui  gaudere  Theatri." 

VOL.  II.  3  D 


394  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

The  course  which  the  Bishop  had  taken  in  endeavouring  to 
do  full  justice  to  that  party  of  the  Presbyters  who  opposed  his 
Election,  and  especially  his  recognition  of  S.  Ninian's  Cathedral 
and  the  friendly  relations  in  which  he  sought  to  place  himself 
with  its  Clergy,  had  been  regarded  with  strong  dislike  by  some 
of  the  Bishops  and  others  in  the  Council  of  Trinity  College. 
There  was  also  felt  a  jealousy  of  his  holding  both  the  positions  of 
Warden  and  Bishop,  on  the  part  even  of  some  who  had  wished 
them  to  be  combined  in  his  person.  He  had  all  along  refused  to 
Vote  for  Mr.  Gladstone  as  a  Representative  of  the  University  of 
Oxford,  and  the  Pamphlet  he  had  Published  was  an  additional 
offence  to  that  Gentleman,  who,  naturally  and  justly,  exerted  a 
predominant  influence  in  the  College  Council,  and  who  had  done 
what  he  could  to  prevent  his  Elevation  to  the  Episcopate.  Mean 
while  the  Secretary  of  the  College,  who,  about  this  time,  ceased 
to  retain  his  Office,  had  allowed  its  pecuniary  affairs  to  become 
greatly  embarassed ;  which  threw  upon  the  Warden  additional 
anxiety,  and  the  necessity  for  increased  exertion  in  its  behalf. 
All  these  considerations — together,  on  the  one  hand,  with  an  en 
larged  desire  to  do  his  full  duty  to  the  Diocese  ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  with  impaired  health,  in  consequence  not  so  much  of  actual 
work  as  of  the  troubles  and  anxieties  he  had  been  called  upon  to 
undergo — induced  him  to  determine  to  resign  the  Wardenship ; 
which  accordingly  he  did  at  Midsummer,  1854;  having  held  the 
Office  rather  more  than  seven  years,  including  a  year  and  a  half 
of  his  Episcopate.  In  every  respect  (except  the  financial  depart 
ment,  for  which  he  was  not  responsible)  the  College  had  prospered, 
and  obtained  a  high  repute  under  his  management.  He  had  been 
fortunate  in  obtaining  the  services  of  excellent  Assistants,  espe 
cially  of  Mr.  Barry  (now  Dr.,  and  Principal  of  King's  College, 
London)  as  Sub-Warden.  The  Junior  Department,  which  had 
opened  with  only  11,  had  risen  to  the  number  of  70  Boys — a  rate 
of  increase  of  10  per  annum  ;  and  the  Senior  Department,  which 
had  commenced  with  3,  had  reached  at  one  time  the  number  of 
13  Theological  Students,  being  one  more  than  that  Department 
was  intended  to  receive. 

On  the  19th  of  July,  an  Episcopal  Synod  met  at  Aberdeen, 


CHARLES  WORDSWORTH.  395 

and,  the  Warden's  Resignation  having  been  given  in  and  accepted, 
the  Bishops  present  agreed  to  a  Document  which  contained,  inter 
alia,  the  following  words  : — •"  The  Bishops  feel  that  gratitude  is 
not  only  due  hut  is  actually  entertained,  on  the  part  of  the  whole 
Scottish  Church,  to  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  for  the  expendi 
ture  that  he  has  made  of  time,  fortune,  and  mental  exertion,  for 
the  good  of  Trinity  College  ;  and  they  hereby  record  their  deep 
appreciation  of  the  self-sacrificing  zeal  which  has  marked  the 
connexion  of  the  first  Warden  with  the  Institution,  which  must 
ever  lead  Scottish  Churchmen  gratefully  to  associate  with  the 
history  and  future  fortunes  of  the  College  the  name  of  CHARLES 
WORDSWORTH."  At  the  same  Synod  Dr.  Hannah,  the  present 
Warden,  was  appointed  as  his  Successor. 

At  the  same  time  a  "Wordsworth  Fund"  was  set  on  foot,  in 
order  to  afford  opportunity  for  the  expression  of  public  gratitude. 
Sir  Roundell  Palmer  contributed  to  it  the  munificent  sum  of 
£500.  Dr.  Wordsworth  was  also  presented  with  a  handsome 
Pastoral  Staff  by  his  Assistants  at  the  College ;  and  with  an 
Episcopal  Seal  and  Ring  by  those  who  had  been  his  Pupils  as 
Theological  Students.  A  further  Record  of  his  Wardenship 
appeared  in  the  shape  of  a  Volume  of  "  Sermons  Preached  at 
Trinity  College,  Glenalmond,  1854,"  seven  of  which  were  by 
himself,  and  the  remainder  by  six  other  Preachers,  Members  of 
the  Staff;  "thus  exhibiting  a  specimen  of  the  ordinary  religious 
teaching  given  at  the  College  during  the  seven  years  of  its  exis 
tence." 

The  future  relations  of  Trinity  College,  Glenalmond,  with  the 
Diocese  of  St.  Andrews,  a  question  beginning  with  the  Bishop's 
retirement,  was  not  finally  settled  until  October,  1856.  The 
College  was  dissevered  from  the  Diocese  of  St.  Andrews,  and 
made  a  Peculiar  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  College  of  Bishops 
—Dr.  Wordsworth  still  consenting  to  hold  the  necessary  Confir 
mations,  when  requested  by  the  Warden. 

The  Bishop  was  now  at  liberty  to  devote  himself  solely  to 
Episcopal  work,  and  to  the  general  affairs  of  the  Church.  With 
the  beginning  of  the  next  year  (1854),  he  began  to  be  known 
more  especially  in  connexion  with  those  efforts  to  persuade  and 


396  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

draw  over  Presbyterians,  with  which  his  name  has  since  become 
inseparably  connected.  For  some  years  previously,  indeed,  the 
columns  of  the  Scottish  Ecclesiastical  Journal  had  shown  how  much 
this  subject  was  upon  his  mind.  In  the  early  Spring  he  Published 
the  first  number  of  the  "St.  Andrews  Tracts,"  a  Copy  of  which 
he  presented  to  every  "Minister,"  of  whatever  Denomination, 
throughout  his  three  Dioceses.  This  undertaking  was  attended 
with  considerable  expense,  and  his  diminished  income,  after  he 
had  resigned  the  Wardenship,  prevented  him,  it  is  believed,  from 
continuing  what  promised  to  be  a  Scries  of  much  interest.  The 
Tract  Published  (pp.  51)  was  a  Reprint,  with  a  few  Notes,  of  the 
first  Chapter  of  the  Sixteenth  Book  of  Bingham's  Antiquities, 
entitled,  "  On  the  Union  and  Communion  of  the  Ancient  Church." 
On  the  4th  of  May,  he  delivered  a  public  Lecture  in  the  City  Hall, 
Perth,  "  On  the  Appointment  of  a  Day  for  National  Humiliation, 
and  the  Difficulties  of  the  Education  Question,"  which  was  Re 
printed  in  the  following  year  under  the  title,  "What  is  National 
Humiliation  without  National  Repentance?"  Afterwards  the 
Bishop  wrote  and  delivered  in  Edinburgh,  Perth,  and  St.  Andrews 
four  Lectures  on  the  subject  of  Unity.  Since  then  his  frequently 
recurring  Charges  on  this  subject,  while  they  have  shown  his 
Lordship's  continued  interest  in  the  matter,  have  exhibited  a  by 
no  means  complete  record  of  the  pains  and  trouble  which  have 
been  bestowed  upon  this  subject,  both  in  its  literary  and  practical 
aspects,  by  him  who  is  perhaps  better  acquainted  with  that  par 
ticular  Controversy  than  any  one  else  now  living.  It  must  suffice 
to  state  shortly  the  Titles  and  Dates  of  the  more  elaborate  of  his 
Publications  of  this  character  :— 

A  Tercentenary  Discourse  on  the  Scottish  Reformation,  I860, 
Reprinted  in  18G3. — An  Address  at  Kidderminster,  1862,  on 
Reunion  of  the  Church  in  Great  Britain,  delivered  in  connexion 
with  the  Bicentenary  of  1G62. — A  Synodal  Address,  1864,  on 
the  Principles  of  "  Episcopalians"  as  a  basis  of  Christian  Union, 
Reprinted  in  1867.  A  considerable  portion  of  this  Address  (con 
taining  the  argument  from  Scripture  in  favour  of  the  Threefold 
Ministry)  has  been  translated  into  Welsh  by  the  S.  P.  C.  K.,  at 
the  instance  of  the  Bishop  of  Llandaff. — A  Synodal  Address, 


CHAELES  WOBDSWOKTH.  397 

I860,  on  the  Ministry  of  the  Church,  Historically  considered, 
with  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the  Church  in  Scotland.— 
A  Plea  for  Justice  to  Presbyterian  Students  of  Theology,  and  to 
the  Scotch  Episcopal  Church,  in  answer  to  some  remarks  of  the 
Very  Rev.  Principal  Tulloch,  I860. 

Considering  how  much  the  Bishop  has  been  engaged  in  writ 
ing  upon  Controversial  subjects,  it  is  gratifying  to  be  able  to  state 
that  Public  Journals,  having  no  sympathy  with  Episcopacy,  have 
borne  witness  not  only  to  the  learning  and  ability,  but  to  the 
charitable  and  becoming  spirit  in  which  he  has  uniformly  advo 
cated  the  Church's  cause — as  the  cause  of  Christian  Unity,  of 
Apostolical  Order,  and  Evangelical  Truth. 

In  returning  to  the  order  of  events  in  the  Bishop's  public  life, 
it  may  be  recorded  that  he  delivered  his  Primary  Charge  in  the 
Perth  Cathedral,  on  S.  Matthew's  Day  (Sept.  21),  1854,  and 
dedicated  it  "to  the  Clergy  and  Laity  of  the  United  Diocese,"  at 
whose  request  it  was  Published.  Its  principal  object  was  to  prove 
that  all  persons  duly  Baptized  are  Members  of  the  Christian 
Church. 

Before  the  Meeting  of  the  ordinary  Synod  of  the  next  year, 
1855,  his  Lordship  had  made  provision  for  calling  the  Laity 
to  a  Visitation  which  succeeded  the  Meeting  of  Synod  on 
the  following  day;  and  here  he  proposed  the  initiation  of  a 
Diocesan  Association  for  Church  purposes,  embracing  a  great 
many  objects  very  desirable,  but  which,  as  yet,  there  lacked  zeal 
on  the  part  of  the  Laity  to  take  up  as  a  whole ;  though  many  of 
these  objects  have  since  been  undertaken  separately  and  in  a  less 
formal  manner.  The  Bishop's  Visitation  Sermon,  from  2  Tim. 
iv.  G,  U0n  the  Twofold  Ministry  of  Clergy  and  Laity,"  was 
Published,  with  an  interesting  "Report  of  the  Proceedings"  of 
the  two  days,  including  a  Discussion  on  the  practice  of  adminis 
tering  Baptism  by  Immersion,  which  had  been  introduced  by  the 
Rev.  Gr.  H.  Forbes  at  Burntisland. 

In  1856,  when  there  was  a  rumour  that  Scotland  was  to  be 
parted  out  afresh  into  Dioceses  in  connexion  with  the  Church  of 
Rome,  the  Bishop  Reprinted  an  Article  which  he  had  contributed 
to  the  first  number  of  the  S.  E.  Journal)  under  the  title  of 


398  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  AXDBEYVS. 

"Papal  Aggression  in  the  East,  or  the  Protestantism  of  the 
Oriental  Church."  The  Paper  is  valuable  for  the  analysis  which 
it  contains  of  the  remarkable  Encyclical  Letter  which  the 
Patriarchs  of  the  East  addressed  in  1848  to  the  Bishop  of  Borne, 
and  of  which  Dr.  Wordsworth  obtained  a  Copy  direct  from 
Constantinople,  through  the  same  Mr.  William  Palmer  before 
mentioned. 

When  the  Eucharistic  Controversy  arose  in  1857,  in  conse 
quence  of  the  Bishop  of  Brechin's  Charge,  the  Bishop  of  St. 
Andrews  was  very  unwilling  to  take  part  in  it ;  but  when  it 
became  necessary  to  do  so,  he  drew  up  the  famous  Pastoral 
Letter  "To  all  faithful  Members  of  the  Church  in  Scotland," 
which  (after  a  few  verbal  alterations)  was  accepted  and  Signed  in 
Synod  by  all  the  Bishops,  excepting  only  the  Author  of  the  Charge 
which  had  given  rise  to  agitation.  In  the  Appeal  of  the  Rev. 
P.  Cheyne,  1858,  the  Bishop's  judicial  "Opinion"  was  concurred 
in  by  the  Court,  but  it  was  far  from  acceptable  to  those  who  were 
seeking  to  obtain  the  recognition  of  a  higher  doctrine  of  the  Holy 
Eucharist.  Dr.  Wordsworth,  both  on  this  occasion  and  in  his 
still  more  elaborate  "Opinion,"  delivered  (18GO)  upon  the  present 
ment  of  the  Bishop  of  Brec.hin,  showed  that  he  accepted  the 
doctrine  of  the  "  Eeal  Presence,"  properly  understood,  but  that 
he  considered  the  addition  of  the  terms  "substantial"  and 
"  objective"  to  be  deficient  in  authority,  and  he  disapproved  still 
more  of  the  so-called  "logical  consequences"  (involving  what  he 
considered  unsound  and  dangerous  views  of  the  Eucharistic 
Sacrifice  and  of  Adoration)  which  had  been  deduced  from  that 
doctrine.  His  own  sentiments  may,  perhaps,  best  be  seen  in  the 
Pamphlet  which  he  Published  anonymously  (1859),  entitled 
"Proposals  for  Peace,  or  a  few  Remarks  on  the  Eucharistic 
Doctrine  of  Bishops  Taylor,  Ken,  and  Wilson."  It  is  due  to 
the  Bishop  to  say  that,  as  he  was  averse  to  the  Controversy  at 
the  first,  so  he  was  anxious  to  allay  its  asperities,  so  far  as  could 
be  done  consistently  with  what  he  believed  to  be  the  truth,  and 
his  own  duty  in  regard  to  it.  It  was  an  especial  pain  to  him  to 
be  brought  into  collision  with  Mr.  Keble,  with  whom  he  had  been, 
while  at  Winchester,  upon  very  friendly  terms  (as  may  be  seen 


CHARLES  WORDSWORTH.  399 

from  the  manner  in  which  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  Preface  of  that 
revered  Author's  "Prselectiones  Academicse"),  but  who  having 
made  himself  in  some  degree  responsible  for  the  original  cause  of 
the  Controversy,  chivalrously  came  forward  to  bear  the  brunt  of 
it.  Though  assailed  more  or  less  vehemently  in  various  quarters, 
the  anonymous  Pamphlet  already  named  and  a  Charge  delivered 
in  the  same  year  (1859)  was  all  that  the  Bishop  Published  in  his 
own  defence  ;  and  of  the  latter  of  these  the  Publication  was 
requested  by  a  formal  Vote  of  his  Diocesal  Synod.  His  "Notes 
to  assist  towards  forming  a  right  Judgment  of  the  Eucharistic 
Controversy,"  occasioned  by  Mr.  Keble's  "  Considerations,  &c., 
addressed"  and  sent  "to  all  Scottish  Presbyters,"  were  Printed 
(but  not  PulU sited)  more  particularly  for  the  guidance  of  his  own 
Clergy;  and  though  the  Bishop  of  Brechin's  "Theological 
Defences,  &c."  were  Published  and  sold  at  large,  the  Bishop  of 
St.  Andrews  withheld  from  Publication  his  judicial  "Opinion," 
and  that  too  was  Printed  only  for  private  circulation,  by  desire 
and  at  the  expense  of  others. 

Dr.  Wordsworth  was  the  first  to  move  for  a  General  Synod 
of  the  Church  for  the  Eevision  and  enlargement  of  the  Canons. 
This  was  in  the  year  1850.  A  Committee  was  appointed  to 
revise  the  existing  Code,  and,  having  completed  their  work,  a 
Synod  was  summoned  to  meet  on  8th  July,  1862.  There  were 
altogether  three  Sessions,  the  second  being  summoned  for  the 
30th  of  September,  and  the  third  for  the  3rd  of  February,  18G3. 
During  the  two  former  Sessions,  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews  was  a 
very  leading  member.  His  Lordship  absented  himself  from  the 
greater  part  of  the  last  Session,  for  the  reasons  above  mentioned. 

It  has  been  sometimes  assumed,  and  represented,  that  our 
Bishop  has  been  opposed  to  the  Scotch  Communion  Office ;  but 
this  is  a  mistake,  as  may  be  seen  by  his  conduct  in  the  case  of 
Meigle,  and  his  Printed  Address  upon  that  case,  1855 ;  and, 
again,  by  his  conduct  in  the  case  of  Muthill,  and  the  Address 
upon  that  case,  1859,  which  he  Published  under  the  title  of  "A 
Plain  Tract  on  the  Scotch  Communion  Office ;  its  History,  Prin 
ciples,  and  Advantages."  The  same  appears  also  from  another 
Publication,  entitled  "Three  Short  Sermons  on  the  Holy  Com- 


400  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

munion,  considered  as  a  Sacrifice,  Sacrament,  and  Eucharist ; 
with  notice  of  the  differences  between  the  Scotch  and  English 
Offices  for  its  Administration."  But  the  most  complete  exposi 
tion  of  his  views  upon  this  subject  is  to  be  found  in  the  Charge 
delivered  at  his  Diocesan  Synod  in  1862,  and  afterwards  Pub 
lished  ;  from  which,  however,  it  appears  that,  in  his  opinion,  the 
Office  had  not  been  wisely  dealt  with  in  its  latest  alterations  by 
the  Bishops  of  the  last  Century ;  and  that  the  advantages  of 
arrangement,  with  one  exception,  are  rather  on  the  side  of  the 
Anglican  Formulary. 

In  December,  18G4,  the  Bishop  was  summoned  to  give  evi 
dence  to  Her  Majesty's  Commissioners  appointed  to  enquire  into 
the  Schools  in  Scotland ;  and  his  sentiments  in  favour  of  a 
general  system  of  Education,  in  which  "Episcopalians"  might 
be  included,  arc  to  be  found  fully  given  in  the  First  Eeport  of 
that  Commission,  pp.  231-240. 

The  Bishop's  Charge  for  1865  contained  an  interesting 
Review  of  the  Progress  made  in  the  Diocese  during  the  twelve 
preceding  years  of  his  Episcopate.  It  appeared  in  the  Scottisli 
Guardian  for  November,  as  well  as  in  several  of  the  Newspapers 
of  the  day,  and  was  entitled,  "  On  the  Position  and  Duty  of  the 
Episcopalian  Laity."  The  results  were  such  as  to  show  that  a 
marked  increase  of  zeal  has  taken  place  among  the  Laity  of  late 
years,  and  that  many  of  them  have  come  forward  in  a  very 
laudable  manner  to  support  their  Bishop,  to  improve  the  position 
of  their  Clergy,  and  at  the  same  time  to  vindicate  their  own 
character,  as  faithful  and  loyal  members  of  the  Church,  by  the 
interest  which  they  take  in  its  welfare,  and  the  desire  which  they 
show  to  promote  its  progress. 

At  the  present  time  the  Bishop  is  engaged  in  building  a 
School-Chapel  in  Perth,  upon  a  site  sufficient  to  hold  also  a 
large  Mission  Church  and  Parsonage,  together  with  School 
master's  House ;  all  which  it  is  hoped  will  follow  before  long. 
In  support  of  this  object  he  Preached  a  Sermon — afterwards 
published— from  S.  James  ii.  10,  "  On  the  Claims  of  the  Poorer 
Brethren  in  Assemblies  for  Christian  Worship :  I860."  In  a 
Note  to  that  Sermon,  page  13,  the  Bishop  expresses  his  "hope 


CHARLES  WORDSWORTH.  401 

that  the  day  is  not  far  distant  when  the  Completion  of  S.  Ninian's 
Cathedral  may  be  looked  for,"  and  his  "  belief  that  the  coming 
of  that  day  will  be  accelerated  rather  than  delayed  by  the  under 
taking  which  is  now  proposed." 

The  latest  Publication  from  Dr.  Wordsworth's  pen  has  been 
the  Synodal  Address  which  he  delivered  at  Perth  on  November 
7th,  last  year  (1867),  entitled  "The  Lambeth  Conference,  its 
Aims  and  Performances ;  with  some  Remarks  upon  the  Address 
of  the  Moderator  in  the  last  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland;"  and  for  which  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  Synod, 
ordered  to  be  specially  recorded  in  its  Minutes.  In  the  opening 
of  that  Address  the  Bishop  mentioned  "  as  a  gratifying  token  of 
the  good  understanding  which  now  happily  exists  between  our 
Scotch  Church  and  the  Church  of  England,"  the  fact  that,  by  the 
invitation  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  he  had  assisted  (on 
S.  Barnabas'  Day,  June  11)  in  the  Consecration  of  his  friend, 
the  Rev.  T.  L.  Claughton,  late  Vicar  of  Kidderminster,  to  be 
Bishop  of  Rochester — the  first  instance,  he  believed,  on  record  in 
which  a  Scotch  Bishop  had  taken  part  in  Consecrating  an  llnylisli 
one.  (The  present  Bishop  of  Argyle  had  assisted  in  a  Welsh, 
and  others,  perhaps,  in  Colonial  Consecrations.)  It  may  be 
interesting  to  record,  from  a  Journal  of  the  day,  what  took  place 
after  the  Diocesan  Synod  : — 

In  the  evening  a  Dinner  was  given  to  the  Bishop  by  the  Clergy  and 
Laity  of  the  Diocese.  A  number  of  the  Gentry  were  present,  and  Lord 
Rollo,  the  Chairman,  read  Apologies  from  others  who  regretted  their  inability 
to  attend  to  do  honour  to  the  Bishop.  After  the  usual  loyal  toasts,  Lord 
Rollo  proposed  the  toast  of  the  evening,  remarking  that  of  all  the  Bishops 
who  had  come  from  regions  far  and  near  to  the  Recent  Lambeth  Conference, 
there  was  not  one  who,  in  learning,  piety,  and  zeal,  was  the  superior  of  their 
own  revered  Bishop.  He  had  heard,  on  the  best  authority — that,  namely, 
of  one  of  the  Bishop's  brother  Prelates  in  England — that  their  Bishop  had 
taken  a  prominent  part  in  the  Lambeth  Conference,  and  had,  on  one  very 
remarkable  occasion,  swayed  the  Conference  for  good,  when  timid  counsels 
seemed  likely  to  influence  it  in  a  wrong  direction.  After  some  other  remarks, 
eulogistic  of  the  Bishop,  for  the  very  powerful  and  impressive  Charge  he  had 
delivered  in  the  forenoon,  and  for  the  manner  in  which  he  presided  over  the 
Diocese  and  performed  all  the  Duties  of  his  Office,  the  toast  was  drunk  with 
all  the  honours. 

As  a  Preacher,  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews  has  occupied  the 
Pulpit  on  several  occasions  (in  addition  to  those  before  mentioned) 

VOL.  II.  8  E 


402  DIOCESE  OF  ST.  ANDREWS. 

of  more  than  ordinary  interest  and  importance.  He  was  among 
the  first  to  Preach,  by  invitation  of  Dean  Trench,  in  the  Nave  of 
Westminster  Abbey,  at  the  Special  Evening  Services,  commenced 
in  the  Spring  of  18-50 ;  and  he  did  the  same  in  each  of  the  three 
following  years.  His  first  Sermon  was  Published  under  the  title 
of  "  The  Christian  Embassy."  By  appointment  of  the  Vicc- 
Chancellor,  he  delivered  at  Oxford,  before  the  University,  the 
annual  Ramsden  Sermon  in  1857  (Published  under  the  title  of 
"The  Mending  of  the  Nets"),  and  again  in  1807.  At  the 
Celebration  of  the  Terccntary  in  honour  of  the  Birth  of  Shak- 
speare,  at  Stratford-npon-Avon,  April  21,  1864,  he  was  selected 
to  Preach,  and  his  Sermon  was  Published  under  the  title  of 
"  Man's  Excellency  a  cause  of  Praise  and  Thankfulness  to  God." 
The  other  Sermon  was  delivered  by  the  Archbishop  of  Dublin,  Dr. 
Trench,  who,  it  is  somewhat  remarkable,  had  been  at  the  same 
Public  School  (Harrow)  with  our  Prelate,  and  in  the  same  class. 
It  may  be  added,  as  a  singular  distinction  for  a  Scotch  Bishop, 
that  Dr.  Wordsworth  has  Preached  in  no  less  than  six  English 
Cathedrals,  including  Westminster  Abbey,  viz.,  Winchester, 
Salisbury,  Peterborough,  Piochester,  and  Chichester. 

As  a  Lecturer,  the  Bishop's  most  interesting  appearance  on 
the  platform  was,  perhaps,  at  Bcrwick-upon-Tweed,  when,  in 
that  Border  Town,  he  appropriately  enlarged  upon  his  favourite 
topic,  "  The  Duty  of  Christian  Unity,  as  regarded  in  the  light  of 
Holy  Scripture  and  of  the  History  of  the  Church.  December, 
1864."  ;See  Scottish  Guardian  for  February,  1865.]  He  also 
read,  by  request,  a  Paper  at  the  Norwich  Church  Congress,  "On 
the  Duty  of  the  Church  towards  Foreign  Christians."  [See 
Report  of  that  Congress,  pp.  123-133.] 

As  an  Author,  besides  the  Publications  already  specified,  he 
is  known  by  a  Volume  on  "  Shakespeare's  Knowledge  and  Use  of 
the  Bible:  1864,"  which  speedily  passed  into  a  second  and 
enlarged  Edition. 

Of  the  Bishop's  two  brothers,  who  were  both  educated  at 
Winchester,  and  became  Fellows  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge, 
one — his  senior  by  a  year — Died  at  an  early  age,  but  not  before 
he  had  acquired  the  reputation  of  being  one  of  the  best  and  ripest 


COLLEGE  BISHOPS.  403 

Classical  Scholars  of  liis  time,  and  had  been  honoured  by  the 
esteem  of  his  Contemporaries,  who  have  raised  to  his  memory  a 
Marble  Bust,  which  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Ante-Chapel  of  his 
College,  appropriately  placed  between  the  Monuments  of  Porson 
and  Dobree.  The  other — his  junior  by  a  year — is  the  Archdeacon 
of  Westminster,  distinguished  on  many  accounts,  but  especially 
for  his  Commentary  and  Notes  on  Holy  Scripture. 

An  anecdote  is  told  respecting  the  great  Duke  of  Wellington 
in  connexion  with  these  three  brothers  which  may  be  worth 
recording.  Every  Prizeman  at  Oxford  is,  or  was,  required  to 
send  a  MS.  Copy  of  his  successful  Composition  to  the  Chancellor 
of  the  University.  When  the  Duke  was  Chancellor,  the  Latin 
Prize  Poem  of  Charles  Wordsworth  was  lying  upon  his  Library 
Table,  and,  a  friend  having  taken  it  up,  the  Duke  remarked,  "I 
consider  the  father  of  the  young  man  who  wrote  that  Poem  the 
happiest  man  in  England  ;"  and  being  asked  why  he  thought  so, 
he  replied,  "Because  all  his  three  sons  have  just  obtained  Uni 
versity  Prizes  at  the  same  time— two  at  Cambridge,  and  one  at 
Oxford."  This  was  in  1827. 


COLLEGE   BISHOPS. 

NowT  is  the  time  to  allude  to  the  Necessity  which  was  the  mother 
of  this  Invention  ;  for  only  the  dire  circumstances  of  the  Poverty 
and  Persecution  endured  by  the  Clergy  at  and  after  the  Pievolu- 
tion  could  palliate  the  anomaly  -of  having  Bishops  at  Large, 
without  Dioceses.  The  Notices  of  the  other  "  College  Bishops" 
are  given  under  the  Dioceses  which  they  afterwards  served.  The 
following  were  never  appointed  to  Dioceses.  "The  Lockhart 
Papers"  evidence  to  what  a  wretched  state  and  low  ebb  the 
Episcopal  Church  of  Scotland  was  reduced,  by  sticking  to  the 
dogma  of  the  Divine  Right  of  Kings,  and  by  being  under  the 
Suffrage  of  "Bonnie  Prince  Charlie"  and  his  Finger-post,  the 
Laird  of  Carnwath ;  as  well,  also,  as  by  the  individual  strifes 
which  for  many  years  lasted  ere  this  rotten  College  System  was 
finally  stamped  out. 


•101  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

77/6'  Life  of  the  Reverend  and  Learned  Mr.  JOHN  SAGE  :  wherein 
also  some  Account  is  given  of  his  Writings,  loth  Printed  and 
in  Manuscript ;  and  some  things  are  added,  towards  the  clear 
ing  the  Ancient  Government  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  from 
the  Mistakes  of  a  late  Author. — "A  good  name  is  rather  to  be 
chosen  than  great  riches."  (Prov.  xxii.  1.)  "  /  have  fought  a 
good  Jight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith." 
(•2  Tim.  ir.  7.) — In  ipsa  CatJiolica  Ecclesia  magnopere  curan- 
dum  cst,  nt  id  teneamus,  quod  idtique,  quod  semper,  quod  ab 
omnibus  creditum  est.  [Vincen.  Lirincnsis,  contra  Haer.  c.  3.] 
—London :  Printed  for  Henry  Clements,  at  the  Half-Moon, 
in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard.  1714. 

[Written  by  the  Plight  Rev.  JOHN  GII.LAN.] 

HAYING  had  the  happiness  of  a  great  share  in  the  friendship  of  the  very 
Eeverend  Mr.  Sage,  and  having  received  inexpressible  satisfaction  and 
advantage  both  from  his  Conversation  and  Writings,  I  think  myself  obliged, 
by  the  Laws  of  friendship  and  gratitude,  to  give  the  world  some  Account  of 
this  excellent  person ;  and  to  do  what  I  am  able  to  preserve  the  memory 
of  so  great  a  man  from  oblivion.  I  wish  it  were  in  my  power  to  write  a 
complete  History  of  his  Life,  and  thereby  to  draw  such  an  exact  picture  of 
him  that  the  Reader  might  have  no  more  to  do,  but  only  carefully  to  imitate 
so  fair  an  example.  But  since  I  could  not  get  such  information  as  is  neces 
sary  to  enable  me  to  Publish  a  full  Account  of  his  Life,  I  shall  go  as  far  as 
I  can,  with  what  I  had  occasion  to  know  myself,  and  what  I  have  learned 
from  persons  of  the  greatest  candor  and  integrity  who  were  his  most  intimate 
and  early  acquaintances. 

Mr.  John  Sage  was  Born  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord,  1G52.  His  Pro- 
Birthplace  and  jrenitors,  for  seven  generations  at  least,  lived  in  the  Parish  of  Creich,  in  the 
Parentage. 

North-East  Corner  of  Fife,  in  very  good  esteem,  and  with  much  reputation. 

His  father  was  a  Captain  in  the  Lord  Duffus's  Regiment  about  the  time  the 
Town  of  Dundee  was  Stormed  and  Taken,  in  the  Year  1G51.  His  Parents 
were  honest  and  virtuous;  and  tho  they  enjoyed  no  great  riches,  nor  any 
plentiful  estate,  yet  they  were  careful  to  have  him  well  educated  at  the 
Schools ;  and  afterward  he  was  sent  to  the  University  of  St.  Andrews, 
where,  after  he  had  fulfilled  the  number  of  years,  and  performed  the  Exer 
cises  required  by  the  Statutes,  he  was  made  Master  of  Arts.  His  noble 
genius  began  very  early  to  appear,  which  he  most  carefully  cultivated  by 
reading  diligently  the  Greek  and  Roman  Authors.  He  was  well  instructed 
in  Logic,  Metaphysics,  and  the  other  parts  of  Philosophy  which  then 


JOHN  SAGE.  405 

obtained  in  the  Schools,  and  which  I  have  often  heard  him  say  he  had  found 
to  he  of  excellent  use  for  understanding  the  Poets,  Historians,  Orators,  and 
even  the  Fathers  of  the  Church,  who  have  been  addicted  to  the  Hypotheses 
and  Principles  of  some  one  or  other  of  the  Philosophical  Sects,  and  do 
frequently  reason  from  their  Notions,  and  often  use  their  Terms  and  Phrases. 

His  narrow  fortune  not  allowing  him  to  be  long  out  of  business,  he  was 
soon  made  School-Master  of  Bingry  [Ballingray]  in  Fifeshire,  a  mean  and  at  Balling'ray. 
inconsiderable  place  ;  and  a  little  after,  he  came  to  be  School-Master  at 
Tippermoor,  in  Perthshire,  where  he  had  little  or  110  opportunity  of  bettering 
his  circumstances.  And  so,  by  close  application  to  business,  and  the  faith 
ful  discharge  of  his  Office,  together  with  the  want  of  the  necessaries,  or  at 
least  the  conveniences  of  life,  he  contracted  the  seeds  of  several  diseases, 
which,  tho  the  strength  of  his  body  and  the  vigour  of  youth  seemed  to  over 
come  then,  yet  they  stuck  to  him,  and  broke  out  afterward  to  the  ruin  of  his 
health,  the  impairing  of  his  strength,  and  the  shortening  of  his  days.  All 
these  disadvantages  notwithstanding,  he  pursued  his  Studies  with  great 
diligence,  and  to  very  good  purpose,  even  contrary  to  that  ordinary  maxim, 
In  paupcrtate  ct  angustiis  unit  d<itur  locus  xtndii*.  Mr.  James  Drummond,  of 
Cultmalundie,  a  good  and  wise  Gentleman,  and  an  excellent  judge  of  merit 
and  worth,  relieved  him  in  some  measure  from  these  hardships  and  pinches, 
by  inviting  him  to  his  family,  where  he  stayed  some  time,  until  his  sous 
were  ready  for  the  School,  and  then  he  was  sent  with  them  as  their  Tutor 
to  the  Public  School  at  Perth.  He  remained  there  several  years,  instruct-  Tutor  to  the 
ing  his  Pupils  with  all  care,  and  improving  himself  in  the  useful  parts  of  at'r'erth0.111 
Learning.  In  that  City  he  had  the  happiness  to  be  known  to  the  Eight 
Eeverend  Father  in  God,  Dr.  Alexander  Eose,  now  Lord  Bishop  of  Edin 
burgh,  and  then  Parson  of  Perth,  whose  friendship  was  of  great  use  to  him, 
and  highly  valued  by  him  all  the  days  of  his  life. 

As  soon  as  his  Pupils  were  fit  for  the  University,  he  accompanied  them 
to  St.  Andrews  ;  and  there  his  excellent  parts,  that  had  hitherto  been  con 
cealed,  except  from  a  very  few,  began  to  shine  more  brightly.  His  piercing 
wit,  solid  judgment,  and  pleasant  temper,  very  soon  endeared  him  to  all  the 
members  of  that  learned  University.  They  were  not  a  little  surprised  to 
find  a  man,  bred  in  obscurity  and  retirement,  of  so  great  sense  and  learning,  st.  Andrews. 
of  so  nice  and  delicate  a  conversation,  and  who  understood  men  and 
manners  so  exactly  well.  His  company  was  courted  by  all  the  Professors 
and  Masters,  and  himself  honoured  and  esteemed  by  all  that  knew  how  to 
value  true  merit.  He  adored  the  Divine  Providence  which  had  blessed  him 
with  the  comfort  and  advantage  of  so  desirable  and  learned  a  Society,  and 
the  opportunity  of  perusing  the  best  and  choicest  Books,  by  which  he 
mightily  improved  himself  in  that  sincere  and  unaffected  piety,  and  true 
and  useful  knowledge,  which  enabled  him  afterward  to  do  so  great  service 
to  the  Church  and  his  Country. 

Mr.  Sage,  after  that  his  Pupils  had  finished  the  Course  of  their  Studies 


406 


COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 


Acquaintance 
with  Bishop 
Rose  at  St. 
Andrews. 


Holy  Orders. 


Ecsidence  in 
Glasgow  in 
KISS. 


His  Sermons 
on  Schism. 


at  the  University,  left  them  in  the  Year  1GS4  ;  and  being  now  at  liberty 
from  business,  thought  himself  obliged  to  visit  his  best  friend  and  patron, 
Dr.  Rose,  then  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  afterward 
Principal  of  the  New  College  in  the  University  of  St.  Andrews,  Bishop  of 
Moray,  and  Bishop  of  Edinburgh,  who  governed  the  Church  in  those  most 
difficult  and  dangerous  times  with  wonderful  prudence  and  conduct,  and 
who,  for  all  the  other  virtues  that  can  adorn  a  Gentleman  or  a  Scholar,  a 
Christian  or  a  Bishop,  was  deservedly  esteemed  and  revered  by  all  persons 
and  all  parties. 

By  the  Doctor,  who  knew  his  great  Learning  and  Piety  as  well  as  any 
man,  he  was  recommended  to  his  uncle,  the  Most  Pieverend  Father  in  God  the 
then  Lord  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  afterward  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  and 
Primate  of  all  Scotland,  who  put  him  in  Priest's  Orders,  and  persuaded  him 
to  exercise  his  Holy  Function  as  one  of  the  Ministers  of  the  City  of  Glasgow. 
He  was  then  about  131  years  of  age,  and  so  did  not  run  too  soon  or  incon 
siderately,  as  too  many  do,  into  an  ofiice  which  requires  so  many  and  great 
qualifications.  Ilis  judgment  was  mature,  and  improved  by  more  than 
ordinary  experience.  He  had  read  the  Holy  Scriptures  with  the  best  Critics 
and  Commentators  ;  he  was  no  stranger  to  Ecclesiastical  History  and  the 
Writings  of  the  Ancient  Fathers,  and  particularly  understood  their  Apologies 
for  the  Christian  Religion.  No  man  was  better  acquainted  with  the  School- 
Divinity  ;  and  yet  this  did  not  hinder,  but  that  he  reasoned  not  only  closely 
and  accurately,  but  also  plainly  and  perspicuously.  He  had  nicely  examined 
the  Modern  Controversies,  especially  those  betwixt  us  and  the  Church  of 
Home,  and  those  betwixt  the  Calvinists  and  Remonstrants.  He  continued 
in  Glasgow  some  years,  where  his  exemplary  life  and  conversation,  his  wise 
and  prudent  conduct,  and  the  faithful  discharge  of  all  the  parts  of  his  Minis 
terial  Function,  made  him  to  be  honoured  and  beloved  by  all  good  men,  as 
one  of  the  greatest  Lights  of  the  Church,  and  esteemed  and  reverenced  even 
by  the  Dissenters  themselves,  and  the  enemies  of  the  Church. 

For  about  the  end  of  the  Year  1G88,  when  the  barbarous  Rabbling  of 
the  Episcopal  Ministers  was  set  on  foot  in  the  West  Country,  thu  he  did  not 
escape  the  common  fate,  yet  he  was  more  civilly  treated  by  those  impious 
despisers  of  all  Human  and  Divine  Laws,  than  some  of  his  Brethren.  He 
had  still  been  sensible  of  the  great  danger  with  Avhich  both  Church  and 
State  was  threatened  from  the  Rebellious  and  Schismatical  Principles  of  an 
ignorant  and  giddy  sort  of  men  ;  and  therefore  had  made  it  his  business  by  the 
strongest  Arguments  and  most  pathetical  Exhortations  frequently  and  boldly 
to  recommend  and  press  the  duty  of  Obedience  and  Loyalty  to  the  King  ;  and 
was  at  no  less  pains  in  his  Discourses  from  the  Pulpit  to  explain  the  Unity  of 
the  Catholic  Church,  and  to  shew  the  necessity  of  Communicating  with  the 
Episcopal  Church,  proving  that  Separation  from  the  Church  of  Scotland, 
and  the  Bishops  and  Subordinate  Pastors  of  it,  involved  those  who  were 
guilty  of  it  in  the  damnable  sin  of  Schism.  And  that  his  Exhortations 


JOHN  SAGE.  407 

might  have  the  more  influence  and  authority,  he  was  wont  to  paint  the 
ocliousness  of  that  sin  in  the  words  of  the  Antients,  saying  with  Dionysius, 
Bishop  of  Alexandria — "  That  it  was  hotter  to  suffer  anything  than  that  the 
Church  of  God  should  he  rent  asunder ;  that  it  was  every  whit  as  glorious, 
and,  in  his  opinion,  a  far  greater  Martyrdom,  to  die  for  not  Dividing  the 
Church,  than  for  refusing  to  sacrifice  to  Idols."  Or,  as  S.  Cyprian  expresses  S.  Cypriau 
it  in  several  places — "  That  a  person  going  from  the  Church  to  Schismatics, 
tho  in  that  capacity  he  should  die  for  Christ,  yet  that  he  cannot  receive  the 
Crown  of  Martyrdom ;  that  such  a  one  has  no  part  in  the  Law  of  God,  or 
the  Faith  of  Christ,  or  in  Life  and  Salvation ;  that  without  this  Unity  and 
Charity,  a  man  cannot  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  ;  and  that  althu  he 
should  deliver  up  himself  to  the  flames,  or  throw  his  hody  to  wild  heasts, 
yet  this  would  not  he  the  Crown  of  his  Faith,  hut  the  Punishment  of  his 
Falshood ;  not  the  glorious  exit  of  a  Religious  courage,  hut  the  issue  of 
despair.  Such  a  one  may  he  killed,  hut  he  cannot  he  crowned.  He  rents 
the  Unity  of  the  Church,  destroys  the  Faith,  disturbs  the  Peace,  dissolves 
the  Charity,  and  profanes  the  Holy  Sacrament."  Tho  thus  he  Preached 
with  that  courage  and  boldness,  plainness  and  ingenuity,  that  became  a 
faithful  Pastor,  yet  at  the  same  time  he  did  it  with  the  spirit  of  Christian 
Charity,  and  a  zealous  concern  for  the  Souls  of  his  People,  which  seldom  fail  ,( 

"  Scl^G  S 

to  gain,  if  not  love  and  obedience,  yet  at  least  esteem  and  reverence,  even  Preaching, 
from  those  who  are  admonished  and  reproved.  And  to  this,  perhaps,  in 
some  measure,  it  may  be  imputed  that  he  escaped  those  outrageous  insults 
and  cruelties,  which  the  rabblers  (after  the  example  of  their  Schismatical 
forefathers,  the  Circumcelliones  in  Africk)  acted  against  others  of  his 
Brethren,  and  especially  those  who  had  all  along  trimmed,  and,  as  far  as 
they  durst,  complied  with  them ;  some  out  of  cowardice,  others  from  an 
affectation  of  popularity,  and  a  few,  who  had  Preached  in  the  Times  of  the 
Solemn  League,  because  they  were  not  altogether  purged  from  the  Old 
Leaven  with  which  they  had  been  soured  before  the  I'est oration  of  the 
Church  and  Pioyal  Family.  The  Saints  contented  themselves  with  giving 
Mr.  Sage  a  A\7arning  to  depart  from  Glasgow,  and  Threatenings  if  he  should 
ever  adventure  to  return  thither  again. 

Much  about  this  time,  he  was  recommended  by  his  Grace  the  Lord 
Primate  to  be  Professor  of  Divinity,  or  Second  Master  in  the  New  College 
of  St.  Andrews  ;  but  before  the  Copy  of  Presentation,  which  was  sent  up  to 
Court  with  the  Lord  Balcaskie  [?  Balcarras — Colin,  third  Earl]  could  be 
put  into  the  King's  hands,  his  Majesty  had  retired,  and  all  things  Avere  gone 
into  confusion.  Happy  had  it  been  for  this  Church,  if  the  forming  of  the 
Minds  and  Principles  of  those  who  designed  to  dedicate  themselves  to  the 
Altar  had  been  committed  to  him,  and  continued  under  his  influence  and 
direction,  together  with  that  great  ornament  of  the  University,  Dr.  James 
Lorimer,  Principal  of  the  New  College,  whose  uncommon  genius,  eloquence, 
quick  wit,  profound  judgment,  and  vast  learning,  accompanied  with  modesty 


408 


COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 


and  humility,  prudence  and  piety,  rendered  most  worthy  of  that  great  trust 
and  dignity. 

-P  , .      ,  Mr.  Sage  being  forced  to  leave  Glasgow,  retired  to  Edinburgh,  where 

Edinburgh.  he  was  far  from  indulging  himself  in  ease  and  idleness ;  for  in  the  Year 
1089  he  wrote  the  Second  and  Third  of  the  Four  Letters  concerning  the 
Persecution  of  the  Clergy  in  Scotland,  which  were  Printed  at  London  the 
same  Year.  Tho  first  was  written  by  a  learned  English  Clergyman,  Mr. 
Thomas  Morer,  who  was  Chaplain  to  an  English  Regiment  which  was  then 
at  Glasgow,  in  Scotland.  He,  as  a  true  son  of  the  Church  of  England,  was 
sensibly  touched  with  the  calamities  of  our  Church  and  Clergy,  and  I  hear 
he  is  now  a  worthy  member  of  that  famous  and  learned  body,  the  Clergy  of 
the  City  of  London.  And  the  fourth  was  written  by  the  great  and  learned 
Dr.  Monro.  In  these  Letters,  some  of  the  severities  and  inhuman  barbari 
ties,  done  by  the  Presbyterian  luibble  against  the  Episcopal  Ministers,  are 
succinctly  narrated  with  the  utmost  truth  and  sincerity ;  for  he  would  not 
have  lied  for  the  best  Cause.  Yet  his  way  of  treating  this  subject  is  artful 
on  the  Calami-  and  curious,  the  things  being  written  in  a  neat  Epistolary  style,  with  great 
tins  of  the  life  ailc|  Spirit.  These  Eolations,  tho  too  well  known  in  our  own  Nation, 
where  the  fatal  Tragedy  had  been  acted,  yet  did  greatly  surprise  our  Neigh 
bour-Nation,  and  gave  a  new  and  fresh  demonstration  of  the  sad  and  fatal 
consequences  that  might  be  feared  from  the  implacable  and  persecuting 
spirit  of  Presbytery,  which,  in  the  unhappy  Times  of  the  Covenant,  had 
made  havock  of  all  things,  both  Sacred  and  Civil,  in  this  Island. 

The  Presbyterian  Government  of  the  Kirk  was  established  by  Act  of 
Parliament  in  Scotland,  in  the  Year  1G90  ;  and  that  this  great  Diana  might 
be  fixed  on  a  most  just  and  honourable  foundation,  by  that  same  very  Act, 
the  horrid  and  impious  deeds  of  the  Eabblers  were  ratified  and  approved, 
and  the  Churches  of  all  the  Episcopal  Ministers,  who  had  been  driven  from 
their  Flocks  by  force  and  tumult,  were  declared  Vacant ;  yea,  even  these 
Legal  Ministers,  who  had  complied  with  the  Civil  Government,  were,  under 
the  pretence  of  their  being  Insufficient,  Negligent,  Scandalous,  and  Errone 
ous,  subjected  to  a  more  than  Spanish  Inquisition  of  about  Fifty  or  Sixty 
Presbyterian  Prelates,  in  whose  hands  the  Government  of  the  Kirk  was 
lodged  by  this  Act.  Iniquity  being  thus  established  into  a  Law,  and  the 
most  atrocious  villanies  being  thus  so  solemnly  ratified  by  those  who  pre 
tended  to  be  advancing  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  to  the  great  reproach  of  our 
Holy  Religion,  and  even  Humanity  itself,  Mr.  Sage  thought  it  necessary  to 
write  some  Sheets  on  this  subject,  tho  he  could  not  get  them  Printed  before 
the  Year  1G93.  This  Treatise  is  called — "  An  Account  of  the  late  Estab- 
ment  of  Presbyterian  Government  by  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  Anno 
1690 :  Together  with  the  Methods  by  which  it  was  settled,  and  the  Conse 
quences  of  it :  As  also  several  Public  Acts,  Speeches,  Pleadings,  and  other 
Matters  of  Importance  relating  to  the  Church  in  that  Kingdom.  To  which 
is  added,  A  Summary  of  the  Visitation  of  the  Universities ;  in  a  Fifth  Letter 


Presby- 
terianism. 


His  Treatise 
thereon. 


JOHN  SAGE.  409 

from  a  Gentleman  at  Edinburgh  to  his  Friend  at  London" — Where  the 
Author  gives  a  most  faithful,  impartial,  and  distinct  relation  of  the  most 
important  affairs  of  that  time,  with  most  judicious,  wise,  and  useful  reflec 
tions  upon  them.  He  also  shews,  that  as  Patronages  of  Churches  were 
legally  established  in  Scotland  before  the  Reformation,  so  they  continued  for 
many  years  after  :  yea,  this  Law  continued  unrepealed  even  to  the  late 
Revolution.  And  tho  the  Presbyterians  began,  about  the  Year  1646  or 
1647,  amongst  other  illegal  Usurpations,  to  introduce  that  cheat  of  Popular 
Elections ;  yet  this  was  not  authorised,  nor  Patronages  abolished  by  the 
Act  of  any  Parliament,  unless  they'll  call  a  Convention  of  Rebels  by  that 
name,  who  had  presumed  to  meet,  Anno  1649,  without  being  called  by  any 
authority,  except  what  they  treasonably  assumed  to  themselves;  and  'tis 
evident  from  the  Acts  of  King  Charles  the  Second's  First  Parliament,  before  Acts  of  Par- 
Episcopacy  was  established,  1661— viz.,  IX.,  XXXV.,  and  LIV.,  Sess.  1—  liament> 
that  Patronages  were  still  looked  upon  as  subsisting  by  Law,  notwithstanding 
the  illegal  interruption  which  had  been  made  by  the  pretended  Parliament, 
1649.  And  the  Author  inserts  at  length  the  Act  of  Parliament,  1662, 
concerning  such  Benefices  and  Stipends  as  have  been  possessed  without 
Presentations  from  the  Lawful  Patrons,  whereby  it  is  enacted — "  That  all 
these  Ministers  who  entered  to  the  Cure  of  any  Paroch  in  Burgh  or  Land 
within  this  Kingdom,  in  or  since  the  Year  1649  (at  and  before  which  time 
the  Patrons  were  most  injuriously  dispossessed  of  their  Patronages),  have 
no  Right  unto,  nor  shall  receive  nor  possess  the  Rents  of  any  Benefice ; 
and  their  Places,  Benefices,  and  Kirks,  are,  ijiso  jure,  Vacant ;  yet  his 
Majesty  declares,  That  this  Act  shall  not  be  prejudicial  to  any  of  these 
Ministers  in  what  they  have  possessed,  and  is  due  to  them  since  their 
admission ;  and  that  every  such  Minister  who  shall  obtain  a  Presentation 
from  the  Lawful  Patron,  and  have  Collation  from  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese 
where  he  liveth,  betwixt  and  the  20th  of  September  next  to  come,  shall 
thenceforth  have  Right  to,  and  enjoy  his  Church  Benefice,  &c.  And  the 
Patrons  are  thereby  Ordained  to  give  Presentations  to  all  the  present 
Incumbents  who  in  due  time  shall  apply  to  them  for  the  same." 

Many  of  these  Ministers,  who  had  entered  illegally  after  the  Year  1649, 
turned  obstinate,  and  refused  to  take  the  Benefit  offered  by  the  Act  of  Par 
liament  at  the  time  prefixed ;  and  therefore  the  Privy  Council  Meeting  at 
Glasgow,  after  the  Term  was  expired,  made  an  Act  declaring  all  such 
Churches,  ipso  facto,  Vacant.  Whereupon  those  Ministers  generally  forbore 
the  Exercise  of  their  Ministry  and  deserted  their  Flocks,  without  any  Sen 
tence  of  Deprivation  pronounced  against  them  but  the  foresaid  Act  of 
Council  at  Glasgow.  Upon  which  they  made  so  hideous  an  outcry  against 
that  most  merciful  Government,  as  if  they  had  suffered  the  most  horrid 
Persecution.  And  if  they  had  good  reason  for  such  complaints,  let  the 
world  judge. 

In  this  Letter,  which  may  be  called  a  Supplement  to  the  former  Four, 

VOL.  II.  8  F 


-110  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

seeing  it  contains  a  short  Account   of  the  bad  treatment  the  Episcopal 
Clergy  had  met  with  from  the  Civil  Power  since  the  2-ith  of  December, 
1089,  we  have  the  Copy  of  a  Petition  to  the  Parliament  from  the  Rabbled 
Kabbled  Ministers,  formed,  as  near  as  could  be,  after  the  Pattern  of  one  yet  extant 

Ministers.  -n  j^jug  Charles  the  First's  Large  Declaration,  which  was  presented  to  the 
Pivsbytcry  of  Edinburgh,  Anno  1038,  against  the  Bishops.  Mr.  Sage  was 
the  person  who  advised  that  this  method  should  be  followed ;  and  he  it  was, 
who,  by  the  appointment  of  his  Brethren,  drew  up  the  Paper,  presented  it 
to  his  Grace  the  Commissioner,  and  briefly  and  plainly  laid  their  case 
before  him. 

This  excellent  person,  tho  forced  from  his  own  Flock,  yet  courted  all 

opportunities  of  doing  good  to  the  Souls  of  men ;  and,  therefore,  so  long  as 

one  or  two  Churches  continued  in  the  possession  of  the  Episcopal  Ministers 

at  Edinburgh,  he  Preached  sometimes  there  ;  and  afterward  was  invited  to 

Sage's  ropu-     perform  Divine   Service,  and  to  Preach  in  one  of  the  principal  Meeting- 

larity.  Houses,  which  was  thronged  with  people  of  the  best  quality  and  sense  ;  for 

his  Sermons  were  most  correct,  eloquent,  and  edifying;  and  what  the  Earl 

of  Roscommoii  said  of  a  famous  English  Preacher,  may  be  truly  applied  to 

him— 

Extensive  sense,  still  into  compass  drew, 

Said  what  was  just,  and  always  something  new. 

He  continued  serving  God  and  edifying  His  Church  in  this  Station 
until  Anno  109 — .     He,  and  some  of  his  Brethren,  who  Preached  in  the 
Mceting-Houses,  were  summoned  before  the  Privy  Council,  and  commanded 
Oath  of  Allegi-  'l0  take  the  Oath  of  Allegiance  and  Assurance  ;  and  they,  frankly  and  ingenu- 
Privy  "council,  ously  owning  their  scruples,  were  not  only  forbidden  to  exercise  any  part  of 
their  Ministerial  Function  within  the   City  and   Suburbs,   but  were  also 
banished  thence  by  an  Act  of  the  Council.     After  this  he  retired  to  Kinross, 
where  he  was  entertained  Avith  great  kindness  and  respect  by  his  excellent 
friend,  Sir  William  Bruce,  Heritable  Sheriff  of  that  Shire,  a  Gentleman  of 
great  honour  and  virtue,  Avho  had  given   early  and  signal  proofs  of  his 
loyalty,  and  did  not  part  with  his  integrity  as  long  as  he  lived,  which  was 
to  a  good  old  age.     But  sometimes  he  lived  with  the  Reverend  and  Learned 
Mr.  Christie,  Minister  of  Kinross,  Avho,  tho  deprived  of  his  Benefice,  still 
dwelt  within  his  own  Parish.     In  the  society  of  those  his  intimate  and  dear 
friends,  he  comforted  himself  under  his  bad  circumstances  and  cross  acci 
dents  of  life,  which  did  not  near  so  much  afflict  him  as  did  the  calamities 
of  the  Church  and  of  his  Country.     It  could  not  but  sensibly  affect  the 
mind  of  so  good  a  man  to  see  the  Ancient  and  Fundamental  Constitution 
broken  into  pieces,  and  the  Church  brought  into  ruin  and  desolation.     The 
Sacred  Order  of  Bishops,  Avho  Avere  the  First  of  the  Three  Estates  of  Par- 
Abolition  of      liament,  was  abolished ;  our  Spiritual  Fathers  were  deprived  of  all  support 
Order  of*         and  maintenance,  tho  at  the  Reformation  the  Popish  Bishops  had  their 
Bishops.  Revenues  continued  to  them  during  their  whole  lives :   a  great  number  of 


JOHN   SAGE.  41.1 

the  faithful  Ministers  had  been  forced  by  violence  from  their  Flocks,  and 
left  with  their  families  in  a  starving  condition.  Scandalous  and  most  false 
Libels  were  brought  in  before  the  Privy  Council  against  many  other  Pious 
and  Learned  Pastors.  They  who  complied  with  the  Civil  Government  were 
processed  and  harassed  before  their  Presbyteries,  Synods,  General  Assem 
blies,  and  Commissions  of  Assemblies ;  which  last,  by  the  way  is  a  Judica- 
tory  no  ways  founded  on  our  Laws,  and  never  was  authorised  by  any  one 
Act  of  Parliament.  The  most  exemplary  piety  and  faithfulness  in  the 
Ministerial  Function  were  not  sufficient  to  protect  any  from  the  Presby 
terian  INQUISITION-.  The  most  frivolous  and  falsest  pretences  were  enough 
to  depose  and  turn  men  out  of  their  Livings  :  one  was  deposed  for  Dancing 
at  a  Bonfire,  when  it  was  proved  that  there  had  been  none  in  the  place  on 
the  day  alleged ;  another  was  deposed  for  reading  and  recommending  T/ie 
Whole  Duty  of  M'/tii.  And  many  other  instances  of  that  kind  might  be  given, 
were  it  necessary,  on  this  occasion.  In  a  word,  all  endeavours  were  used 
to  destroy  the  Church,  Eoot  and  Branch.  These  sad  and  grievous  calami 
ties,  I  say,  could  not  but  sensibly  touch  the  mind  of  so  good  and  charitable 
a  man  as  Mr.  Sage  was  ;  and  yet  he  possessed  his  soul  in  patience,  and 
adored  the  Divine  Providence,  with  entire  submission  to  the  "Will  of  God, 
being  fully  persuaded  that  the  Great  Governor  of  the  world  is  just  in  all 
His  Avays,  and  orders  all  things  so  as  that  they  shall  tend  to  the  good  of 
those  who  love  Him. 

During  his  retirement  at  Kinross,  he  wrote  "  The  Fundamental  Charter 
of  Presbytery,"  Avhich  was  also  sent  to  London,  December,  1093,  but  not  "Work  on  "The 
Published  before  the  Year  1005  ;  for  the  severity  of  the  then  Government  charter  of  ' 
would  not  suffer  any  such  Books  to  be  Printed  in  Scotland ;  and  it  was  Piesbytery." 
judged  no  less  than  Treason,  and  subverting  of  the  Government,  to  Publish 
any  Sheet  against  the  Tyranny  of  Presbytery,  or  in  vindication  of  Episco 
pacy.  The  Convention  of  Estates  in  the  Claim  of  Eight  had  declared — 
That  Prelacy  is  and  hath  been  a  great  and  insupportable  grievance  to  this 
Nation,  and  contrary  to  the  inclinations  of  the  Generality  of  the  People  ever 
since  the  Eeformatioii  (they  having  reformed  from  Popery  by  Presbyters), 
and  therefore  ought  to  be  abolished.  And  the  Parliament,  in  their  Act, 
had  established  the  Presbyterian  Government,  not  on  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
or  on  the  Practice  of  the  Primitive  Church,  but  on  the  same  inclinations  of 
the  People,  and  our  having  been  reformed  by  Presbyters.  Th<">  the  first  was 
laughed  at  and  exposed  by  all  who  knew  the  true  state  of  this  Nation,  and 
it  was  certain  that  not  one  of  three  parts  of  the  Vulgar  were  for  Presbytery, 
and  not  one  of  ten  amongst  the  Gentlemen  and  People  of  Education  ;  yet, 
for  the  satisfying  of  strangers,  the  learned  Author  has  in  this  Book  given 
himself  the  trouble  to  prove  that  Prelacy  was  not  an  insupportable  grievance 
to  this  Nation,  nor  contrary  to  the  inclinations  of  the  People  ever  since  the 
Eeformatioii ;  and  particularly,  that  it  was  not  so  when  this  Article  was 
established  in  the  Claim  of  Eight  or  repeated  in  the  Act  establishing 
Presbytery. 


412 


COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 


Proof  against 
Presbytery. 


The  nature 
of  Mr.  Rule's 
"U'orks. 


Sage's  EiTor. 


He  quite  overturns  the  other  Pillar  of  Presbytery,  by  proving  that 
several  Bishops,  Abbots,  and  Inferior  Clergy  turned  Protestants,  and  were 
concerned  in  the  Reformation ;  that  our  Chief  Reformers  were  so  far  from 
condemning  Episcopacy,  or  superiority  of  Pastors  over  others,  that  they 
instituted  Superintendents,  whom  he  demonstrates  to  have  been  superior  to 
the  other  Ministers  in  no  less  than  thirty  instances  ;  that  they  highly 
extolled  the  Doctrine,  Discipline,  and  Government  of  the  Church  of  Eng 
land  ;  and  that  Presbyterian  Parity  was  not  broached  in  Scotland  for  several 
years  after  the  Reformation.  He  makes  it  as  evident  as  the  Sun  at  Xoon, 
that  the  present  Scottish  Presbyterians  have  forsaken  our  Reformers  in  the 
Faith,  Worship,  Discipline,  and  Government  of  the  Church ;  yea,  that  they 
have  receded  from  all  other  Reformed  Churches  in  the  whole  world,  and 
even  from  their  Predecessors  for  several  years  after  the  Covenant.  This 
Book  lets  us  see  how  accurate  and  judicious  an  Historian,  and  how  excellent 
a  Critick  the  Author  was,  and  acquaints  us  with  several  things  not  known 
before,  and  sets  the  obscure  and  doubtful  Transactions  of  the  Times  of  the 
Reformation  in  a  much  clearer  light  than  ever  had  been  done  by  any  of  our 
Historians.  Some  have  blamed  Mr.  Sage  for  the  severity  and  freedom  with 
which  he  treats  Mr.  Rule  in  the  Preface  to  this  Book ;  but  those  who  knew 
this  vindicator  of  the  Kirk,  Mr.  Rule,  and  his  method  of  writing  and  answer 
ing  Books,  will  be  of  another  mind.  His  Pamphlets  were  stuffed  with  most 
virulent  spite  and  malice  against  those  whose  miserable  circumstances  might 
have  moved  pity  and  compassion  in  the  hearts  of  the  most  imbittered 
enemies.  The  plainest  and  best-attested  matters  of  fact  were  denied  by  him 
with  astonishing  boldness  :  no  man  ever  reasoned  more  weakly,  or  used 
more  disingenuous  shifts  and  evasions,  or  fell  into  more  ridiculous  and 
childish  blunders.  He  had  been  often  fairly  admonished  and  solidly  con 
futed,  but  all  to  no  purpose  ;  and  therefore  it  was  thought  necessary  to 
paint  him  in  his  true  colours— to  silence  him,  if  it  was  possible,  by  shame 
— or  at  least  to  hinder  the  weak  and  credulous  from  being  deluded  by  him. 
And  the  Author  designed  that  this  should  have  been  Published  apart  by 
itself;  but  those  at  London,  to  whom  it  was  entrusted  (for  what  reason  I 
know  not),  tacked  it  to  the  Preface  of  the  '^  Fundamental  Charter,"  without 
the  Author's  knowledge,  and  contrary  to  his  intention.  It  is  true,  indeed, 
that  in  the  body  of  this  Book,  and  some  other  of  his  Writings,  he  speaks 
ironically,  and  uses  a  little  raillery  in  those  places  where  his  matter  and 
subject  allowed  it  him ;  but  he  does  it  with  so  much  wit  as  gives  life  and 
beauty  to  his  Discourses,  and  at  the  same  time  keeps  up  that  grave  and 
serious  character  which  became  himself,  and  runs  throughout  all  his  Pieces. 
And  here  I  will  frankly  and  candidly  acknowledge,  that  in  this  Preface  he 
hath  fallen,  by  inadvertency,  into  a  mistake,  but  such  an  one  as  is  very 
pardonable ;  and  I  choose  the  rather  to  mention  it,  because  his  adversaries 
have  not  taken  the  least  notice  of  it,  and  'tis  the  only  error  that  I  have 
observed  throughout  all  his  Writings.  Mr.  Sage  pretends  to  bring  infallible 
Proofs  that  Knox  was  not  the  Author  of  "  The  History  of  the  Reformation 


JOHN  SAGE.  413 

of  the  Church  of  Scotland,"  commonly  attributed  to  him.  The  arguments 
brought  by  him  are  indeed  so  strong  and  convincing  that  it  would  be 
impossible  to  resist  the  force  of  them,  if  the  Passages  on  which  they  are 
founded  were  not  the  Interpolations  and  Additions  of  Mr.  David  Buchanan, 
who  Published  a  new  but  very  unfaithful  Edition  of  that  Book  at  Edinburgh, 
1G44.  This  was  the  Edition  which  Mr.  Sage  made  use  of,  and  all  the  places 
cited  by  him  from  pages  447,  449,  30G,  and  286,  are  entirely  wanting  in  the 
Old  Editions,  and  particularly  in  that  Printed  Anno  1584.  Tho  Mr.  Sage's 
proofs  do  evidently  and  undeniably  discover  the  disingenuous  and  unfair 
dealing  of  the  Presbyterians,  in  obtruding  upon  the  world,  for  the  genuine 
Work  of  Mr.  Knox,  the  Interpolations  of  one  who  wrote  upwards  of  70  years 
after  his  death ;  yet  they  can  be  of  no  use  in  determining  the  question, 
whether  or  not  Knox  was  the  Author  of  that  Book,  as  we  have  it  in  the 
oldest  Editions.  Neither  can  I  agree  with  Mr.  Sage,  that  the  most  Reverend 
and  Learned  Archbishop  Spottiswoode  has  proved,  by  demonstration,  that 
Work  to  be  spurious  ;  for  this  great  man's  reasoning  is  wholly  founded  upon 
the  reference  that  is  made  to  ''The  Acts  and  Monuments"  of  Mr.  Fox, 
which,  he  pretends,  were  not  Published  until  twelve  years  after  Knox's 
death ;  and  yet  'tis  plain  that  this  is  a  mistake.  I  am  persuaded  that  the 
oldest  Copy  which  the  Bishop  saw  of  that  Book  was  Printed  so  late  ;  but  it 
is  certain  that  the  First  Edition  was  Published  eight  or  nine  years  before 
Knox  Died ;  for  William  Reynolds,  in  his  Refutation  of  Whitaker,  cites  an 
Edition  of  "  The  Acts  and  Monuments,"  Printed  at  London,  15G3  ;  and  they 
are  cited  by  Stapleton  in  his  Preface  to  the  Translation  of  "  Bede's  History," 
Anno  15G5;  yea,  Nicolaus  Harpsfield,  under  the  borrowed  name  of  his 
friend  Alanus  Copus,  Wrote  and  Printed  his  Dialogue  against  them,  Anno 
15G4-G5.  But  when  Fox's  Book  was  first  Published,  or  whether  Knox  was 
the  true  Author  of  the  History  or  not,  is  a  matter  of  moonshine;  and 
neither  Mr.  Sage's  reasonings  in  his  Book,  nor  the  support  of  the  cause 
which  he  undertook,  depend  in  the  least  upon  the  determination  of  those 
niceties. 

Th6  all  care  was  taken  to  conceal  the  Author  of  the  Books  written  by  TT 

.  P     n    ii  •  "1S  Author- 

Mr.  Sage,  yet  it  was  to  no  purpose.     In  spite  ot  all  the  caution  that  was  ship  discovered 

used,  it  was  soon  discovered  by  the  Presbyterians  that  he  was  the  person 
who,  to  their  eternal  reproach,  had  thus  exposed  their  principles  and  prac 
tices  ;  and  this  filled  them  with  the  highest  resentments  against  him,  which 
they  did  not  fail  to  express  as  often  as  they  had  opportunity ;  for  his  affairs, 
and  a  passionate  desire  of  visiting  his  dear  friends  at  Edinburgh,  obliged 
him  to  venture  thither  for  a  few  days.  But  thu  some  of  his  Colleagues,  who 
had  been  banished  with  him,  were  allowed  to  stay  there,  or  at  least  con 
nived  at ;  yet  he  no  sooner  came  to  the  City  than  he  was  observed  on  the 
Street  by  a  Privy  Councillor,  whose  greatest  pleasure  was  to  persecute  the  Arrestctl  in 
Episcopal  Clergy ;  and,  by  his  Order,  he  was  carried  before  the  Magistrates  Edinburgh, 
of  the  City,  and  obliged  to  find  Bail  to  leave  the  Town,  and  never  to  return 
thither. 


414  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

Tliis  severity  compelled  him  to  go  back  to  his  former  retirement  in 
"The  Prin-  Kinross,  where  he  wrote  a,  Book,  intituled  '%  The  Principles  of  the  Cyprianic 
ciplcs  of  the  Age,  with  regard  to  Episcopal  Power  and  Jurisdiction,"  Printed  at  London 
Age."'1"1  toward  the  end  of  the  Year  101)5  ;  the  occasion  of  writing  which  was  this  : — 

Mr.  Gilbert  Rule,  the  Vindicator  of  the  Kirk,  had  said  once  and  again,  in 
several  of  his  Pamphlets,  "that  he  and  his  Associates  would  confess  them 
selves  to  be  Sehismaticks,  if  it  could  be  proved  that  Diocesan  Episcopacy 
was  established  in  S.  Cyprian's  days" — a  bold  and  unwary  step,  to  put  their 
cause  on  so  desperate  an  issue  !  But  at  that  time  all  things  were  going 
before  the  wind  with  them,  as  the  Proverb  is,  and  they  thought  they  might 
do  the  most  unjustifiable  actions,  and  say  the  most  absurd  things,  without 
controul.  This  excited  Mr.  Sage  to  read  and  consider  again  more  exactly, 
and  willi  this  particular  view,  the  Works  of  S.  Cyprian  and  his  Contempo 
raries  ;  and  the  result  of  his  study  and  pains  was  this  excellent  Treatise,  in 
which  he  proves,  to  the  conviction  of  all  that  are  not  entirely  abandoned  to 
prejudice  and  interest,  that  Diocesan  Episcopacy  was  established  and 
thoroughly  settled  over  all  the  Christian  Church  in  the  days  of  S.  Cyprian. 
And  this  I  have  heard  the  learnedest  and  most  judicious  of  the  Presbyterians 
acknowledge,  th<">  at  the  same  time  they  were  not  aware  of  the  just  and 
necessary  consequences  which  the  Patrons  of  Episcopacy,  and  Mr.  Sage  in 
particular,  have  drawn  from  it,  even  to  the  ruin  of  all  pretences  for  Prcsby- 
Presbytemns  tcry.  This  performance  so  much  the  more  incensed  Hie  Party  against  him, 
determine  to  t]  {t  {]  ^solved  bv  all  means  to  ruin  him;  and  for  this  end,  being 

nun  S:\ge.  ••  •  .  . 

informed  that  he  had  adventured  to  return  to  Edinburgh  in  1000,  and  his 
much  honoured  friend  Sir  William  Bruce  being  about  that  time  committed 
close  prisoner  to  the  Castle  of  Edinburgh,  upon  suspicion  of  keeping  Cor 
respondence  with  the  Court  of  St.  Germains.  they  thought  his  intimacy  with 
Sir  Yulliam  was  a  plausible  enough  pretence  for  accusing  him  also,  and 
throwing  him  into  some  nasty  Prison,  which  might  either  put  an  end  to  his 
life,  or,  at  least,  force  him  to  petition  for  a  Voluntary  Banishment,  which 
had  been  the  fate  of  some  others  ;  and  therefore  the  same  Privy  Councillor, 
who  had  shown  his  spite  against  him  before,  ordered  the  Captain  of  the 
Town  Guards,  with  a  party  of  his  Soldiers,  to  search  all  the  houses  where 
they  were  informed  he  was  wont  to  lodge  or  visit.  But,  by  the  good  Provi 
dence  of  God,  and  the  care  of  his  friends,  he  was  concealed  for  some  eight 
days,  and  put  on  board  a  Boat  at  Leith,  and  safely  landed  at  Kinghorn,  tho 
at  the  same  time  all  the  Passages  and  Harbours  of  Forth  were  strictly 
guarded  with  Soldiers.  Yet  even  then  he  did  not  think  himself  safe,  for  he 
His  escape.  was  certainly  informed  that  Spies  were  sent  to  all  Places  of  the  Country  for 
discovering  and  apprehending  him ;  and  therefore  he  made  his  escape  to  the 
Hills  of  Angus,  where,  under  the  name  of  Mr.  Jackson,  and  the  person  of 
one  that  wanted  good  air  and  goat  milk  for  his  health,  he  lurked  many 
months,  until  his  constant  and  faithful  friend,  Sir  William,  was  set  at 
liberty,  and  those  in  the  Government  were  brought,  by  much  pains  and 
powerful  solicitations,  to  a  milder  temper. 


JOHN  SAGE.  -415 

Some  time  afterward  lie  was  earnestly  invited  to  go  into  the  Family  of 
the  Eight  Honourable  the  Countess  of  Calendar,  a  most  virtuous  and  excel 
lent  lady,  worthy  of  that  loyal  and  noble  Family  of  Montrose,  of  which  she 
was  immediately  descended.  Having  110  Estate  or  Money  of  his  own,  and 
being  unwilling  to  be  troublesome  to  his  friends,  when  he  could  be  useful  to 
others,  he  accepted  the  Lady's  invitation,  and  officiated  as  Chaplain  in  the  the^ountesa 
Family,  and  Tutor  to  her  son,  the  Earl  of  Linlithgow  and  Calendar,  whom  of  Calendar, 
he  carefully  educated  in  true  Religion  and  Virtue,  and  instructed  in  those 
Languages  and  Sciences  that  became  a  Scholar  and  a  Gentleman.  The 
Earl  retains  the  good  instructions  he  then  got  from  his  excellent  and  worthy 
Master;  and  his  Lordship's  good  sense,  judgment,  sweet  and  obliging  car 
riage,  free  from  all  formal  and  affected  Ceremony,  and  his  other  improve 
ments  and  accomplishments  suitable  to  his  Ancient  Race  and  High  Quality, 
plainly  shew  us  that  he  was  educated  by  no  less  a  Tutor  than  Mr.  Sage  ;  for 
which  his  Lordship  always  made  great  acknowledgments  to  him  when  living, 
and  has  a  profound  respect  for  his  memory  now  that  he  is  dead. 

One  would  have  thought  that  Daily  Reading  of  the  Prayers,  Preaching  His  laborious 
on  Holy  Days,  and  the  other  Pastoral  Duties,  with  the  laborious  trouble  of  Duties, 
instructing  Pupils,  would  have  been  too  much  work  for  one  man,  and 
especially  a  person  whose  strength  and  health  had  been  mightily  impaired 
by  former  study  and  sufferings ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time  he  did  not  neglect 
to  support  the  interest  of  the  aiilicted  Church  by  his  learned  and  eloquent 
pen.  For  thu  he  might  have  justly  expected  from  Mr.  Rule  publick  acknow 
ledgment  of  his  Schism,  according  to  his  repeated  promises  and  engagements, 
having  fully  performed  the  condition  on  which  they  were  given  ;  yet  this  his 
Adversary,  being  one  of  those  men  Avho  are  equally  strangers  to  Faith  and 
Modesty,  had  the  boldness  to  Publish  a  certain  '•  Short  Answer  to  the 
Principles  of  the  Cyprianic  Age,''  which  he  called  "  The  Cypriauic  Bishop 
Examined.''  And  thu  this  is  nothing  but  a  confused  heap  of  unaccountable 
subterfuges,  bad  reasonings,  and  surprizing  blunders,  and  therefore  deserved 
no  answer ;  yet  because  Mr.  Sage  knew  that  Mr.  Rule's  authority  was  not 
small  amongst  the  ignorant,  and  being  willing  to  search  this  matter, to  the 
bottom,  and  to  discuss  it,  which  he  always  did  with  all  the  subjects  he  had 
occasion  to  handle,  he  Published  at  London,  1701,  "  A  Vindication  of  a 
Discourse  intituled  '  The  Principles  of  the  Cypriauic  Age,  with  regard  to 
Episcopal  Power  and  Jurisdiction  ; '  being  a  Reply  to  G.  Rule's  '  Cypriauic 
Bishop  Examined,  and  found  not  to  be  Diocesan.'  Wherein,  besides  a  great 
many  things  more  briefly  considered,  the  Usefulness  of  fixing  the  Principles 
of  the  Cypriauic  Age  is  succinctly  represented.  The  main  Controversy 
between  those  of  the  Church  and  the  Presbyterians  is  fully  and  distinctly 
stated ;  Mr.  Rule's  many  Subterfuges  are  utterly  overthrown ;  Large  Sup 
plements  are  added  to  the  Principles  of  the  Cyprianic  Age  ;  the  Cypriauic 
Episcopacy  is  shewn  to  be  inconsistent  with  Papacy  ;  and  it  is  demonstrated, 
that  Episcopal  Government  was  universally  delivered  to  be  of  Divine  Right 


-116  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

in  the  days  of  S.  Cyprian."  This  makes  a  large  Book,  and  all  that  is 
promised  in  the  Title  is  fully  performed.  He  had  said  in  the  last  Page  of 
His  design  in  tlie  Cyprianic  Age  "  that  he  had  designed  to  have  made  it  appear  that  the 
Publishing  the  Episcopal  Pre-eminence,  which  was  so  notoriously  and  unquestionably 
Prelatical  in  S.  Cyprian's  time,  was  no  novel  Usurpation  or  late  Invention; 
not  at  all  the  Production  of  the  Cyprianic  Age,  nor  any  Age  later  than  the 
Apostles ;  that  Saint  Cyprian  and  all  his  Contemporaries  firmly  believed  it 
to  be  of  Divine  Institution  ;  that  they  had  not  entertained  it,  having  so  little 
temporal  encouragement,  nay  so  great  and  many  temporal  discouragements, 
to  entertain  it,  if  they  had  not  so  believed;  and  they  had  great  reason  for 
this  their  Belief,  as  fairly  founded  on  our  Saviour's  own  Ordinance,  and 
fully  handed  down  to  them  in  the  constant  Practice  of  the  Universal  Church 
from  the  first  Plantation  of  Christian  Churches  ;  that  it  passed  among  them 
as  a  common  Principle,  that  Bishops  were  clearly  contradistinct  from  Pres 
byters,  and  superior  to  them  ;  that  Bishops,  as  Heads  and  Principals  of 
Unity  to  their  respective  Churches,  were  the  rightful,  true,  and  genuine 
Successors  of  the  Apostles,  in  the  Supreme,  Visible,  Ecclesiastical  Power  of 
Governing  the  Churches  whereof  they  were  Bishops."  Now,  he  had  suffi 
ciently  established  and  proved  the  truth  of  all  these  Propositions  in  this 
Book ;  tho,  if  it  had  pleased  God  to  have  granted  him  time  and  health,  he 
resolved  to  have  discoursed  more  fully  and  particularly  concerning  the 
Institution  of  Episcopacy  by  our  Saviour  and  his  Apostles,  and  the  uninter 
rupted  Practice  of  the  Church  to  S.  Cyprian's  days. 

It  were  earnestly  to  be  wished  that  our  Dissenting  Brethren  would  read 

and  consider,  without  prejudice,  the  Books  written  on  this  subject  by  Mr. 

Sage  and  Mr.  Rule.     For  my  part,  I  dare  confidently  say  I  never  read  a 

How  the          Dispute  managed  so  unjustly,  confusedly,  or  so  little  to  the  credit  of  the 

Dispute  was  r  " 

managed.  Author  on  the  one  side,  or  with  so  much  candour,  fairness,  and  exactness  on 
the  other.  He  has  left  a  MS.,  which  he  calls  "  An  Historical  Account  of  the 
General  Assembly,  1702,  in  the  time  of  the  Formula."  It  consists  of  Five 
Sheets  and  an  Half.  In  it  he  gives  a  full,  clear,  and  distinct  Account  of  the 
Formula,  and  has  at  the  end  of  it  very  just  and  good  reflections  on  those  of 
the  Episcopal  Communion  who  addressed  that  Assembly. 

In  the  Year  1703,  when  a  Toleration  was  intended  by  some  of  the 
Ministers  to  have  been  moved  in  Parliament,  for  the  ease  of  the  Episcopal 
Clergy,  and  many  smart  and  ingenious  Pamphlets  were  Published  to  favour 
and  promote  that  design,  the  most  part  of  them  were  submitted  to  his 
censure  and  corrections ;  and  he  himself  being  importuned  by  his  friends, 
wrote  and  Printed  at  Edinburgh,  "  Some  Remarks  on  a  Letter  from  a 
Williamson's  '  Gentleman  in  the  City  to  a  Minister  in  the  Country,  on  Mr.  David  "William- 
Sermon,  son's  Sermon  Preached  before  the  late  General  Assembly."  The  reflections 
are  judicious,  and  full  of  that  life  and  spirit  which  run  through  all  his  Per 
formances  ;  and  sweet  Mr.  David  is  so  handsomely  chastised  for  his  many 
blunders  in  Sense,  Grammar,  History,  and  Divinity,  that  if  he  had  been 


JOHN  SAGE.  417 

possessed  of  the  least  shame  or  modesty  he  had  never  adventured  to  Preach 
any  more  in  so  public  a  place,  at  least  not  to  have  Printed  such  pitiful, 
ridiculous,  and  incoherent  stuff. 

Immediately  after  this,  he  Published  a  small  but  yet  a  substantial  and 
comprehensive  Discourse,  containing-  a  brief  Examination  of  some  things  in  Hc  al 
Mr.  Meldrum's  Sermon,  Preached  May  10,  1703,  against  a  Toleration  to  toto.  MeL^ 
those  of  the  Episcopal  Persuasion.  Here  he  called  in  question  the  validity  ll 
of  Presbyterian  Ordination,  and  consequently  of  the  Sacraments,  and  other 
Sacerdotal  Offices  invaded  by  them.  This  did  not  a  little  alarm  the  Party, 
and  therefore  Mr.  Mcldrum  was  obliged  to  give  it  an  Answer,  which  occa 
sioned  a  Reply  Printed  at  Edinburgh  in  1704,  and  afterwards  Reprinted  at 
London,  which  is  intituled  ';  The  Reasonableness  of  a  Toleration  of  those  of 
the  Episcopal  Persuasion  enquired  into,  purely  on  Church  Principles;  in 
Four  Letters  to  Mr.  George  Meldrum,  Professor  of  Theology  in  the  College 
of  Edinburgh."  Here  the  Controversy  is  discussed  fully  and  largely;  and 
one  cannot  sufficiently  admire  the  strength  of  his  reasonings,  and  the  great 
clearness  and  exactness,  not  only  in  explaining  and  defending  his  own 
sentiments,  but  in  laying  open  those  of  his  Adversary ;  for  he  understood 
true  Church  Principles  beyond  most  men;  to  which  Mr.  Mcldrum  seemed 
altogether  a  stranger.  I  shall  say  no  more  on  this  head,  but  only  recom 
mend  to  the  Reader's  perusal  those  excellent  Letters,  from  which  he  cannot 
miss  to  receive  full  satisfaction  in  this  weighty  and  important  matter. 

AYhen  Mr.  Sage  was  living  at  Ealkirk  in  the  Countess  of  Calendar's 
Family,  Mr.  Thomas  Forrester,  late  Principal  of  the  New  College  of  St. 
Andrews,  happening  to  visit  his  friends  in  Stirlingshire,  and  falling  into 
Conversation  with  Mr.  John  Cuningham,  a  Gentleman  of  the  firmest 
integrity  and  strictest  virtue,  eminent  for  learning,  and  especially  famous 
for  his  singular  knowledge  in  the  Law,  which  he  professed  and  taught  for 
several  years  with  great  applause,  and  to  an  unspeakable  advantage  of  his  ^ve^ec^ning 
Country ;  a  Debate  arose  concerning  the  Divine  Right  of  Episcopacy  and  ]iam  and  For° 
Presbytery,  in  which  it  seems  Mr.  Cuningham  had  the  better;  for  Mr.  restcr- 
Thomas  Forrester,  as  it  were,  conscious  to  himself  of  it,  thought  fit  to  send, 
some  days  after,  to  Mr.  Cuuiugham,  a  long  Letter  upon  the  same  subject. 
But  though  Mr.  Cuningham  was  no  stranger  to  that  Controversy,  nor  un 
acquainted  with  Ecclesiastical  History,  and  therefore  more  than  able  to 
encounter  that  Goliath  of  the  Party  ;  yet  such  was  his  singular  modesty  that 
he  would  not  employ  his  pen  on  a  subject  that  seemed  to  be  without  his 
Province,  and  therefore  prevailed  with  Mr.  Sage  to  write  an  Answer  in  his 
name  to  Mr.  Forrester.  It  consists  of  three  or  four  Sheets,  and,  thu  written 
very  hastily,  deserved  very  well  to  have  been  made  public;  but  neither  Mr. 
Sage  nor  Mr.  Cuningham  would  permit  it,  especially  since  no  reply  was 
made  to  it. 

The  Earl  of  Linlithgow  being  well  advanced  in  his  Studies,  and  prepar 
ing  to  go  abroad  to  his  Travels,  Mr.  Sage  thought  he  could  not  any  longer 
be  so  useful  to  that  Honourable  Family,  and  therefore  readily  complied  with 
VOL.  n.  3  G 


418 


COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 


Sage  Pastor  ii 
the  Family  of 
Stewart  of 
Garntullv. 


Seized  with 
illness  at  Kin- 
rosi. 


Treatment  he 
received  in 
London. 


Returns  to 
Scotland. 


the  invitation  ho  got  from  the  much  honoured  John  Stewart  of  Garntullv,  a 
Gentleman  well  affected  to  the  Ancient  Monarchy  and  Apostolical  Govern 
ment  of  the  Church.  For  several  years  he  performed  faithfully  the  Office  of 
a  Pastor  in  that  Gentleman's  house.  His  extraordinary  endowments,  and 
especially  his  exemplary  life  and  conversation,  and  his  consummated 
wisdom  and  prudence,  made  him  dear  to  all  the  numerous  and  excellent 
relations  and  friends  of  that  great  family.  And  his  influence  and  care 
reached  over  all  that  Country ;  for  as  he  was  highly  admired  and  esteemed 
by  all  ranks  of  men,  so  he  was  most  careful  to  employ  the  rare  talents  God 
had  given  him  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  all.  About  the  end  of 
November,  170G,  he  went  to  visit  his  dear  friend,  the  Reverend.  Mr.  Christie, 
at  Kinross,  where  he  was  seix.ed  with  a  numbness  in  his  legs,  and  an  atrophy 
over  his  whole  body.  By  this  he  was  confined  to  his  bed  three-quarters  of 
a  year,  so  that  his  Physicians  and  friends  despaired  of  his  recovery;  yet  il 
pleased  God,  beyond  all  hope,  to  restore  him  to  some  better  health  and  more 
strength,  tho  he  continued  still  weak  and  sickly  oven  to  his  death.  Being 
advised  by  his  Physicians  to  go  for  his  health  to  the  Bath,  he  went  thither 
in  1709.  He  stayed  there  and  at  London  about  the  space  of  a  year;  and 
thu  he  studied  by  all  means  to  lurk  and  bo  unknown,  yet  his  fame  and 
reputation  being  spread  over  all  England,  by  reason  of  his  learned  and 
elaborate  Writings,  he  was  very  soon  known,  and  his  company  and  conver 
sation  very  much  courted,  lie  then  became  acquainted  with  the  Lord 
Bishop  of  London,  ])r.  Lloyd  (late  Bishop  of  Norwich),  Dr.  Ilickcs,  Mr. 
Lesly.  Mr.  AYagstaff,  Mr.  Collier,  Dr.  Cave,  Dr.  Smalridge,  Mr.  Ellies,  and 
a  great  many  more  of  the  most  learned  and  eminent  men  of  that  Nation,  of 
whoso  civility  and  kindness  he  still  retained  a  most  thankful  sense,  and 
expressed  the  same  on  all  occasions.  For  many  years  he  kept  a  Correspon 
dence,  by  Letters,  with  the  incomparably  learned  Mr.  Dodwcll  :  and  tho  he 
admired  the  primitive  piety  and  profound  knowledge  of  that  excellent  man, 
yet  he  most  passionately  regretted  the  extravagant  and  unwary  positions 
advanced  by  that  great  Author  in  most  of  his  later  Pieces.  He  was  pleased 
to  show  me  a  Letter  Avhich  he  sent  to  Mr.  Dodwell,  wherein  he  friendly,  but 
withal  very  freely  and  boldly,  gave  him  his  thoughts  concerning  his  Book  of 
"The  Natural  Mortality  of  the  Soul;"  and  he  has  left  behind  him  in  MS. 
several  Sheets  against  him  on  another  subject. 

He  was  mightily  importuned  by  his  friends  in  London  to  stay  among 
them,  and  to  try  the  Bath  another  season ;  but  finding  tho  use  of  the  Bath 
waters  unsuccessful  towards  his  recovery,  and  being  more  .sensible  than 
others  of  the  gradual  decay  of  nature  in  himself,  he  desired  to  be  excused, 
and  told  them  he  had  a  great  longing  to  see  his  own  Country,  and  die  there. 
He  therefore  returned  home,  still  sickly  and  weak  in  body,  yet  the  vigour  of 
his  mind  was  as  strong  and  lively  as  ever;  as  may  be  seen  from  an  Intro 
duction  to  Drummond  of  Hauthornden's  History  of  the  Five  King  Jameses, 
written  by  him  and  Published  in  the  Year  1711 ;  which  is  a  piece  of  excel 
lent  criticism,  wherein  the  scattered  arguments  for  the  Legitimacy  of  Robert 


JOHN   SAC.]-.  410 

the  Third  arc  brought  together,  the  mistakes  of  no  mean  Authors  arc 
modestly  and  justly  censured,  and  the  whole  matter  rendered  more  clear 
and  distinct  than  ever  had  been  done  before,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  all 
honest  and  loyal  men. 

Mr.  Sago  left  behind  him  Notes  and  Observations  on  several  subjects 
to  which  he  had  not  given  the  finishing  stroke.  I  shall  mention  but  two  or 
three  Designs  which  he  had  in  his  View.  The  Presbyterians  had  prevailed 
with  the  Parliament  of  Scotland  to  impose  Subscribing  the  Westminster 
Confession  of  Faith  as  a  necessary  qualification  of  all  Ministers,  and  of  all 
Masters  and  Professors,  in  Schools,  Colleges,  and  Universities ;  and,  pursu 
ant  to  this  Act,  they  were  all  obliged  to  Subscribe  and  own  it,  not  merely 
as  a  Bond  of  Peace,  but  as  the  Confession  of  their  Faith ;  that  is,  in  plain 
language,  they  were  bound  to  believe  every  proposition  in  it  as  true,  and 
agreeable  to  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Mr.  Sage  therefore  thought  it  would  be 
no  small  service  done  to  his  Countrymen  to  present  them  with  an  impartial 
and  accurate  survey  of  that  Confession  ;  and  in  order  to  it  he  had  proposed 
to  shew — 

1.  That  it  contained  many  abstract  metaphysical  Propositions  vastly 
removed  from  the  Substantiate  of  the  Christian  Pieligion,  and  which,  without 
any  hurt  to  the  Christian  Faith,  might  be  disputed  problematically. 

2.  That  there  were  in  it  many  other  obscure  and  doubtful  Propositions, 

controverted  among  Christians  of  all  Communions  ;  in  determining  of  which  His  objections 

'  '  to  tlio  Yvest- 

the  Westminster  Assembly  had  chosen  that  side  of  the  question  which  is  minster  Con- 

f  •*  -  .  r 

contrary  to  the  Doctrine  of  the  whole  Christian  Church  for  more  than  three  p^°n  c 
hundred  years  after  Christ,  and  at  this  day  is  rejected  not  only  by  the 
generality  of  Christians  in  the  Greek,  Roman,  Lutheran,  and  English 
Churches,  but  also  by  many  of  those  who  pretend  to  a  purer  Reformation, 
yea,  by  some  of  the  most  pious  and  learned  among  the  English  Presby 
terians  themselves. 

o.  And  lastly,  that  this  Confession  was  inconsistent  with  itself,  several 
Propositions  in  it  being  repugnant  and  contradictory  to  others. 

I  have  often  heard  this  excellent  person,  with  much  grief  and  concern, 
regret  the  want  of  a  complete,  plain,  and  impartial  System  or  Body  of 
Divinity,  rescued  from  the  prejudices  of  modern  parties,  and  founded  on  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  as  interpreted  by  Primitive  Antiquity.     He  was  no  wise  ^t^a  corn- 
satisfied  with  the  Calvinistic  Systems,  but  saw  the  weakness  and  heterodoxy  piete  System 
of  them  in  many  points  ;  neither  was  he  pleased  with  those  of  the  Eemon-  c 
strauts,  for  several  weighty  reasons,  but  especially  because  their  Doctrine 
seemed  to  give  too  much  favour  and  allowance  to  the  Arians  and  Sociniaus, 
and  he  often  discoursed  of  them  as  generally  Trimmers  when  treating  of  the 
unfathomable  mysteries  of  our  Holy  Eeligion,  and  that  in  some  measure 
they  imitated  Socinus  and  his  Disciples  in  their  mean  and  low  thoughts 
concerning  the  necessity  and  efficacy  of  the  Christian   Sacraments.     He 
could  not  at  all  bear  their  certo  quodam  moth  and  objective,  by  which  they 
represented  the  exhibiting  and  conferring  of  Grace  in  the  Sacraments.     He 


•IliO 


COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 


Sage's  inten 
tion"  to  reply 
to  Sir  James 
Dalrymple. 


Augustin's 
Conference 
with  British 
Bishops  and 
Doctors. 


complained  that  none  of  their  Systems  had  explained  sufficiently  the  nature 
and  unity  of  the  Catholic  Church  as  a  Visible  Society,  and  the  obligations 
that  lie  upon  Ecclesiastical  Subjects  to  obey  and  adhere  to  their  Spiritual 
Governors,  arising  necessarily  both  from  the  nature  of  society  in  general, 
and  the  peremptory  Precepts  of  the  Christian  Religion.  lie  thought  the 
most  of  them  defective  in  representing  the  necessity  of  a  regular  and  lawful 
Mission  to  all  the  Rulers  and  Pastors  of  the  Church.  Seeing  immediate 
Calls  from  Christ  ought  not  to  be  pretended  without  sufficient  Credentials, 
even  such  as  those  by  whom  the  Apostles  proved  their  power  and  authority 
to  have  been  from  Heaven,  therefore  none  ought  to  be  owned  as  true  Minis 
ters  of  Christ  but  those  who  have  received  their  Orders  from  the  Successors 
of  the  Apostles  ;  and  consequently  he  judged  it  a  thing  necessary,  and  of 
weighty  moment,  to  shew  distinctly  and  clearly  who  were  these  Successors, 
and  in  whom  the  power  of  conferring  Orders  were  lodged.  It  would  be 
tedious  to  relate  here  all  the  other  errors,  faults,  and  imperfections  which  he 
observed  in  these  Systems  or  Common  Places,  which  have  so  much  corrup 
ted  the  Minds  and  debauched  the  Principles  of  the  Students  of  Divinity. 

Tho  his  want  of  opportunity  and  health  did  not  suffer  him  effectually 
to  set  about  so  hard  and  difficult  a  task;  yet,  I  doubt  not,  but  that  if  God 
had  thought  iit  to  preserve  him  to  sec  the  Church  restored,  and  himself  in 
the  exercise  of  that  high  dignity  of  which  the  Divine  Mercy  and  Providence 
had  rendered  him  worthy,  he  would  have  engaged  one  or  more  persons  of 
sufficient  abilities  to  undertake  so  useful  and  necessary  a  "Work ;  and  I  am 
persuaded  no  man  would  have  been  more  willing  nor  able  to  have  given 
them  encouragement  and  assistance. 

Mr.  Sage  resolved  once  to  Publish  a  Confutation  of  the  groundless 
conceits  of  the  learned  Sir  James  Dalrymple,  who,  in  his  Collections  con 
cerning  the  Scottish  History,  would  make  the  world  believe  that  the  Scots 
had  no  Bishops  before  the  middle  of  the  Tenth  Century,  when  a  Bishop  was 
settled  at  Kilrimont,  in  the  Reign  of  Indulphus,  about  the  year  9G3,  accord 
ing  to  his  computation  ;  and  that  their  Religious  Monks,  under  the  designa 
tion  of  Culdees,  maintained  the  purity  of  Religion,  free  from  the  Romish 
corruptions,  even  to  the  beginning  of  the  Fourteenth  Century.  I  am  told 
that  Mr.  Sage  has  left  some  Sheets  upon  this  subject,  tho  not  finished  and 
fitted  for  the  Press.  Perhaps,  besides  his  bad  state  of  health,  he  was  at  last 
sensible  how  much  this  trouble  was  unworthy  of  him ;  seeing  the  falshood 
of  these  Fictions,  tho  supported  by  Sir  James'  authority,  cannot  possibly 
gain  credit  with  any  who  are  not  altogether  under  the  power  of  prejudice 
and  bias  to  a  party,  or  utterly  ignorant  of  Church  History.  Bede  himself, 
on  whom  this  Author  mostly  founds,  makes  the  contrary  as  clear  as  sun 
shine.  Does  he  not  assure  us  that  there  were  Bishops  among  the  Britons 
at  the  coming  of  Augustan  into  Britain,  and  the  Scots  agreed  with  the 
Britains  in  everything,  yea,  in  Ceremonies  and  Rituals  themselves  ?  He 
informs  us  (Hist.  Eccles.,  lib.  ii.,  cap.  2),  that  Augustin  had  a  Conference 
with  the  Bishops  and  Doctors  of  the  greatest  and  nearest  Province  of  the 


JOHN  SAGE.  '121 

Britons  ;  and  that  Seven  Bishops,  ami  many  other  most  learned  men,  came 
to  a  Second  Meeting— Ycncruiit  nt  pcrliibcnt  Septeui  Britoues  Episcopi  et 
plures  Alii  doctissimi.  Sir  James  pretends  that  these  were  only  Doctors, 
as  were  also  those  present  at  the  First  Conference,  whom  the  Historian  calls 
J'Ji./tcopns  sire  Doctores,  "  Bishops  or  Doctors;"  but  distrusting,  it  seems,  so 
weak  a.  subterfuge,  he  adds — "Allowing  them  to  have  been  Bishops,  they 
were  not  such  as  the  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph  alledges,  that  is,  Diocesan 
Bishops."  But  every  one  is  the  best  interpreter  of  his  own  meaning;  and 
therefore  let  us  suffer  the  venerable  Bedo  to  explain  himself.  Laurentius, 
Successor  of  Augustin,  Mellitus,  and  Justus,  wrote  a  Letter  to  the  Scottish 
Bishops  and  Abbots,  in  which  they  distinguish  Dagenius  a  Bishop  and 
Columbanus  an  Abbot.  And  John,  then  Elect  Pope,  with  others,  writes  a  Tope  John's 
Letter  addressed  thus — To  the  Most  Beloved  and  Most  Holy  Thomianus, 
Columbanus,  Chromanus,  Dinanus,  and  Bathanus,  ]}lx}i<>j>x :  to  Chromanus, 
Ilermanus,  Laustianus,  Stellanus,  and  Segianus,  7Y/V.^ :  to  Saranus,  and 
the  rest  of  the  Scottish  l)o<-ior*  and  Abbot*.  Sir  James  says,  p.  120,  Thomi 
anus,  Chromanus,  and  Daganus  were  Irish,  not  Scots  Bishops,  as  has  been 
:-:aid  ;  but  whether  he  has  said  it  elsewhere  or  not,  I  am  sure  he  has  not 
proved  it.  He  indeed  barely  affirms,  p.  05,  that  the  Exhortation  given  by 
Laurence,  with  his  other  Saxon  Bishops,  was  to  the  Scots  both  inhabiting 
Britain  and  Ireland  ;  and,  in  like  manner,  the  Letter  written  by  John,  Elect 
Bishop  of  Borne,  was  to  them.  And,  p.  77,  having  mentioned  the  Address 
of  Pope  John's  Letter,  >•  Dilectissimis  Sanctissimis  Thomiano,  Colum- 
bano,"  &c.,  he  adds  immediately,  "  among  whom  are  mentioned  some  of  the 
Scots  in  Ireland,  as  Columbanus,  whom  Du  Pin  calls  a  Monk  of  Bangor." 
It  is  no  rare  thing  to  see  Irish  or  English  Writers  endeavouring  to  rob  us  of 
our  Ancient  Countrymen  ;  but  it  is  no  small  wonder  to  find  a  Scotsman,  and 
one  who  sets  up  for  a  Patron  and  Defender  of  the  Antiquity  of  his  Nation, 
borrowing  the  principal  weapon  by  which  they  think  to  destroy  the  honour 
and  glory  of  the  Ancient  Kingdom.  I  know  no  better  excuse  for  it  but  that 
all  things,  even  the  most  weighty  and  valuable  interests,  are  but  small 
enough  sacrifices  to  the  great  Idol  1  '/•<•* /////<•/•//. 

Bede  docs  indeed  tell  us,  before  he  gives  us  the  Letter,  that  Archbishop 
Laurence  bestowed  his  care  not  only  on  the  New  Church  which  had  been 
gathered  from  among  the  Angles,  but  also  on  the  Ancient  Inhabitants  of 
Britain,  and  also  the  Scots  who  inhabit  Hibernia,  the  nearest  Island  to 
Britain.  But  it  seems  Sir  James  had  forgot  what  he  says  in  his  Preface, 
it  22,  "  That  he  thought  it  no  whim  that  Egbert's  Expedition  in  Hiber-  Egbert's 

.          11-         •  ,    ^     •  ,  Expedition. 

niam  was  not  into  Ireland  but  into  Galloway  or  Argyleshire,  it  being  not 
only  the  opinion  of  Sir  George  Mackenzie  but  of  Eerrarius  that  these  parts 
of  Scotland  were  at  that  time  called  Hibernia,  as  well  as  Ireland."  And 
again  he  says,  p.  3  of  his  Book,  "  That  the  Scots  arc  frequently  called  by 
Gildas  and  Bcde  llHienii."  But  granting  that  Bede  thought  the  Letter  of 
Archbishop  Laurence,  Mellitus,  and  Justus,  was  written  to  the  Scots  both 
in  Britain  and  Ireland,  yet  I  can  see  no  reason  for  thinking  the  same  of 


COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

Tope  John's  Letter.      Sir  James  owns  that  Segiauus  or  Segenius  was  tlio 
Mime  with  him  who  was  Presbyter  ami  Abbot  of  Icolmkill,  when  Aiclan  got 
the  Degree  of  a  Bishop,  and  was  sent  to  convert  the  Northumbrians.     What 
proof  then   does  lie    bring  that   Thomianus,   Columbanus,   &c.,   were  not 
Scottish  Bishops,  as  well  as  Segianus  a  Scottish  Presbyter  ?     He  says  that 
Bishop  Columbanus   was  an  Irishman,   whom  l)u   Tin   calls   a    Monk  of 
Bangor.     But  here  lie  is  altogether  mistaken.     This  Columbanus  whom  he 
means,  was  Abbot,  not  of  Bangor,  but  of  Bencor,  in  the  Eastern  part  of 
Ireland,  and  was  never  a  Bishop.     I  am  of  opinion  that  he  is  the  v^ry  same 
who  is  designed  Abbot  Columbanus  in  Archbishop  Laurence's  Letter,  and 
whom  lie  met  in  France  :  for  Laurence  was  Consecrated  Bishop  of  Canter 
bury,  Anno  001.  and  therefore  might  very  easily  have  seen  Columbanus, 
who,  having  left  Ireland,  travelled  into  Britain  about  the  Year  u8<),  and 
after  some  stay  there  removed  into  Burgundy,  and  Founded  the  Abbey  of 
Luxevil,  of  which  he  was  Abbot  about  20  years;   and  then,  being  banished 
by  Theoderick,  King  of  Austrasia,  he  retired  into  Italy,  and  Founded  the 
Monastery  of  Bobio,  near  Naples,  where  he  was  Abbot  a  year,  and  then 
Died.     But  let  us  suppose  that  the  Letter  was  written  to  the  Scots  in  Ire 
land,  and  to  them  only,  and  that  all  the  Bishops  mentioned  in  it  were  Irish  : 
yet  this  would  be  enough  to  prove  that  the  Scottish  Church  settled  in  Britain 
had  also  Bishops.     Sir  James,  p.  81,  afiirms  that  it  cannot  be  inferred  that 
the  Scots  and  Picts,  being  of  the  same  Principles  with  the  Britons,  had 
Bishops  as  well  as  they;  for  the  Argument  would  be  as  good,  that  they  all 
being  of  the  same  Principles  the  British  had  no  Bishops,  properly  so  called, 
as  had  neither  the  Scots  and  Picts.     If  it  could  be  evidently  proved  that  the 
Ancient  Scots  were  not  governed  by  Bishops,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
Ancient  Scot-    tnc  British  Churches  had  Bishops,  certainly  it  would  not  be  inferred  from 
tish  Bishops.     lhc  Scottish  Parity  that  the  British  wanted  Bishops,  nor  from  the  British 
Prelacy  that  the  Scots  Avere  governed  by  Bishops.     In  this  case  the  only 
necessary  inference  would  be  that  these  two  Churches  did  not  exactly  agree 
in  all  Pieligious  Matters,  but  differed,  at  least,  in  the  Government  of°thc 
Church.     But  upon  the  supposition  that  the  Scottish,  Pictish,  Irish,  and 
British   Churches  perfectly  agreed  in   their   Principles,   and   even   in  the 
smallest  circumstances  of  lieligion,  the  argument  must  necessarily  conclude 
from  the  one  to  the  rest,  and  the  plain  practice  of  the  Church  must  deter 
mine  the  obscure  and  controverted  practice  of  the  other  three.     Now,  Sir 
James  himself  owns  (and  I  know  of  none  that  ever  called  it  in  question)  that 
these  Churches  did  agree  in  everything ;  and,  therefore,  if  Tomianus,  Colum 
banus,  &c.,  were  Irish  Bishops,  the  Church  of  Scotland  could  not  have  been 
without  Churchmen  of  the  same  Order  and  Character;   especially  seeing 
Columba  was  a  Member  and  Abbot  of  the  Irish  Church,  who  converted  the 
Picts  and  Founded  the  famous  Monastery  of  Hyi,  which  multiplied  into  so 
many  Eeligious  Houses  in  Scotland,  and  is  said  to  have  had  so  much  Juris 
diction  over  both  Clergy  and  Laity. 

But  to  return  to  Bede.     Oswald,  King  of  Northumberland,  having  been 


JOHN  SAGE.  423 

Baptized  in  Scotland,  where  lie  had  lived  some  time  iu  banishment,  earnestly 
desiring  the  Conversion  of  his  Subjects,  wrote  to  the  Scottish  Bishops 
(designed  here  by  Bede  ^Injorcs  n«tu,  and  in  the  5th  Ch.  Saii/jres,  the  very  Kin(r  Oswald 
word  by  v\iiich  Tertnllian  designs  Bishops,  A}><>lo<j.  c.  39),  entreating  that  sends  to  Scot- 
Antistes,  a  Bishop,  might  be  sent  to  instruct  his  Subjects.  The  Scots  i>"i101^  a 
immediately  despatch  a  Missionary  to  him ;  but  he  being  of  a  somewhat 
rugged  and  severe  temper,  and  therefore  unsuccessful,  returned  homo  and 
made  a  Report  of  his  Mission  in  a  Synod  of  the  Bishops  and  Clergy,  by 
Avhoin  Aidanus  was  appointed  his  Successor,  and  judged  worthy  of  the 
Character  of  a  Bishop ;  and  so  they  Ordaining  him  sent  him  to  Preach  the 
Gospel  in  Northumberland.  In  the  beginning  of  Chap.  5,  Lib.  3,  it  is  said 
that  Aidanus  was  sent  to  instruct  the  Nation  of  the  English,  after  he  had 
obtained  the  Degree  of  a  Bishop  ;  and  iu  the  beginning  of  Chap.  3  Bede  calls 
him  Bishop  Aidanus.  Now,  what  can  be  the  meaning  of  his  being  thought 
worthy  of  the  Office  of  a  Bishop,  and  his  being  Ordained  ?  Certainly  he  was 
a  Presbyter  before  he  was  a  Monk  of  Hyi;  and  a  Member  of  the  Synod,  and 
spoke  and  reasoned,  and  made  a  great  figure  in  it.  All  this  must  therefore 
import  no  less  than  his  advancement  to  a  dignity  superior  to  that  of  a  Priest, 
and  therefore  we  find  that  Bede  still  calls  him  by  Titles  importing  no  less, 
who  informs  us  also  that  at  the  corning  of  the  Bishop  the  King  gave  him 
Holy  Island  for  the  scat  of  his  Bishoprick,  as  Aidan  himself  had  desired. 
After  the  death  of  this  most  holy  man,  Finan  being  Consecrated,  and  sent 
by  the  Scots,  succeeded  him  in  the  Bishoprick  of  Holy  Island  ;  and  he,  again, 
was  succeeded  by  Coleman,  who  was  also  sent  by  the  Scots.  Ccdd,  a  Priest, 
is  invited  from  the  Middle  Angles  by  King  Oswi,  and  sent  with  another  Priest 
for  his  Assistant,  to  convert  the  East  Saxons,  who,  having  converted  many 
there  to  the  Christian  Faith,  came  to  Holy  Island  to  visit  Bishop  Finan, 
and  receive  advice  and  directions  from  him.  Finan  being  informed  of  his 
success,  made  him  Bishop  of  the  East  Saxons,  having  sent  for  two  other 
Bishops  to  assist  him  in  the  Consecration.  Cedd  being  thus  advanced  to  the 
Order  of  a  Bishop,  returned  to  his  own  Province  ;  and  now  that  his  authority 
was  enlarged,  he  proceeded  to  finish  the  work  that  he  had  begun,  and  formed 
Churches  in  several  places,  and  Ordained  Priests  and  Deacons  to  assist  him 
in  Preaching  and  Baptizing.  The  two  first  Bishops  of  the  Mercians  and 
Middle  Angles  were  Diuma  and  Cellach,  both  Scotsmen;  and  the  third,  Bis 
Triumhere,  tho  an  Englishman,  yet  was  Consecrated  by  the  Scots.  To  England. 
Coleman  succeeded,  in  the  Bishoprick  of  Holy  Island,  Tuda,  who  had  been 
instructed  and  Consecrated  a  Bishop  by  the  Southern  Scots.  'We  are  told 
by  Bede,  lib.  8,  cap.  23,  that  Cedd,  Cymbyl,  Ceulin,  and  Ceadda,  four 
brothers,  were  all  Priests,  and  two  of  them  attained  to  the  Honour  of  the 
Priesthood;  for  Cedd  was  Bishop  of  the  East  Saxons,  and  Ceadda  was  Con 
secrated  Bishop  of  York  by  AYini,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  assisted  in  the 
Consecration  by  two  British  Bishops,  who  observed  Easter  contrary  to  the 
Romish  Custom.  'Tis  true,  Bede  informs  us,  that  Theodorus,  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  did  afterwards  object  against  the  Canonicalness  of  Ceadda's 


424 


COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 


Scottish 
Bishops  with 
no  specified 
Diocese. 


Itinerary 
.Priests. 


Consecration  ;  and  ho  himself  says,  lib.  8,  cap.  28,  that  there  was  no  Bishop 
in  all  Britain  at  that  time  Canonic-ally  Ordained,  but  only  "\Vini;  hut  their 
reason  for  this,  as  Sir  James  will  own,  was  because  Ccadda  and  the  other 
Bishops  had  received  their  Consecration  from  those  who  paid  no  submission 
to  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  and  differed  from  that  Church  in  the  Observation  of 
K;i-tcr,  the  Form  of  the  Monastieal  Tonsure,  and  some  other  Rites.  I  shall 
not  make  any  tedious  reflections  on  those  instances,  both  because  I  study 
all  possible  brevity  and  the  bare  mentioning  of  them  makes  it  most  plain 
and  evident  that  the  Scots  and  Britons  had  Bishops  distinct  from  and 
superior  to  Priests,  long  before  they  submitted  to  the  Papal  authority. 

But  Sir  James,  no  doubt,  will  say,  tho  the  Scots  and  Britons  had 
Bishops,  yet  these  were  far  from  being  Diocesan  Bishops.  To  which  I 
answer — It  is,  indeed,  the  common  opinion  that  the  Ancient  Scottish  Bishops 
were  not  confined  to  particular  precincts,  nor  had  any  determined  limits 
assigned  to  their  Jurisdiction  ;  but  that  they  exercised  their  Sacred  functions 
and  authority  at  large,  and  were  in  their  Diocese  in  everyplace  of  the  King 
dom  where  they  travelled.  But  what  advantage  can  the  Presbyterians  gain 
by  this?  The  Scottish  Bishops  were  superior  to  their  Presbyters,  and 
exercised  Jurisdiction  over  them;  yea,  each  of  them  had  no  less  a  Diocese 
than  the  whole  Country  of  the  Scots,  which  sufficiently  destroys  the  pre 
tended  Divine  Parity  of  Ecclesiastics.  The  Church,  in  most  parts  of  the 
World,  thought  fit,  for  wise  and  good  reasons,  to  restrict  the  ordinary 
Jurisdictions  of  Bishops  to  certain  and  fixed  bounds;  but  this  was  only  a 
circumstance,  and  not  at  all  essential  to  the  Sacred  Office.  The  Blessed 
Apostles,  who  were  the  first  Bishops  of  the  Christian  Church,  exercised  their 
Episcopal  Jurisdiction  at  large  and  in  common,  and  each  had  the  whole 
World  for  his  Diocese.  Tho  S.  Peter  is  said  by  the  Ancients  to  have  been 
Bishop  of  Rome,  S.  James  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  and  S.  John  of  Ephesus, 
yet  they  were  as  truly  and  properly  Bishops  before  they  took  upon  them 
selves  the  particular  care  of  those  Churches  as  they  were  after.  Justices 
of  Peace  are  Justices  in  as  proper  a  sense  when  they  act  in  common  over 
a  whole  Country,  as  if  the  Jurisdiction  of  each  was  confined  to  a  single 
Parish.  The  Scottish  Bishops  were  as  truly  Bishops  as  their  Presbyters 
were  Priests.  Any  who  look  into  Bede  will  find  that  for -many  years  there 
were  none  but  Itinerary  Preachers  or  Priests  sent  by  the  Bishops  from  the 
Cathedrals  or  Monasteries  where  the  Bishops  resided  to  Preach  the  Gospel 
in  the  Country  Churches,  who  were  recalled  and  others  sent  in  their  room 
according  as  the  Bishops  thought  convenient.  There  were  then  no  fixed 
Cures  or  Titles,  and  the  Rural  Churches  were  not  divided  into  Parishes. 
As  it  therefore  is  not  necessary  for  a  Priest  to  be  restricted  to  one  particular 
Parish,  so  it  is  accidental  to  a  Bishop  to  be  confined  to  a  single  Diocese. 
But,  after  all,  tho  it  has  been  the  prevailing  and  hitherto  uncontested 
opinion  that  the  Scottish  Bishops  did  exercise  their  Sacred  authority  in 
common,  and  at  large,  yet  I  dare  confidently  say  that  the  contrary  seems 
probable,  from  all  the  few  and  imperfect  Accounts  we  have  left  to  us  of  the 


JOHN  SAGE.  425 

Practice  of  the  Scottish  and  British  Churches.    Tho  the  Scottish  Bishops  had 
no  large  Revenues  in  Land  assigned  them  for  the  maintenance  of  themselves  Revenues  of 
and  Clergy  before  the  settling  of  Bishops  at  Kilrimont,  Murthlack,  &c.,  yet the  Bish°Ps- 
they  had  the  Offerings  of  the  Faithful,  which  in  the  earliest  times  were  the 
whole  Revenues  of  the  Church  all  the  World  over ;  and  it  is  more  than  pro 
bable  that  they  had  their  ordinary  Eesidence  in  the  most  convenient  places  of 
their  several  Districts,  especially  in  the  most  famous  Monasteries,  where  the 
body  of  their  Clergy  resided  with  them,  and  were  thence  sent  out  by  them  to 
plant  or  cultivate  Churches  in  those  places  where  it  was  needful,  or  where 
they  had  the  best  prospect  of  success.     Thus  it  was  among  the  Britons  and 
the   Scottish  Bishops  in  England.     We  find  the   Subscriptions   of  Three 
British  Diocesan  Bishops  who  were  present  at  the  Council  of  Aries,  Anno 
314,  viz.,  Eborius,  Bishop  of  York;   Restitutus,  Bishop  of  London;   and 
Adelphius,  Bishop  de  Civitate  Colonia  Londinensium,  or  rather  (as  Stilling- 
fleet  reads  it,  Col.  Leg.  11),  Ex  Civitate.     Sir  James  Dalrymple  says  that 
the  sufficiency  of  the  proof  for  this  is  doubted  by  Selden.    But  shall  Selden's 
doubting  destroy  the  faith  of  an  ancient  Testimony  ?     If  Sir  James  will  have 
himself  and  us  to  be  determined  in  things  of  this  kind  by  the  authority  of 
Selden,  then  he  must  necessarily  own  that  some  British  Bishops  were  present 
at  the  Council  of  Sardica,  Anno  3i7;   tlio  he  calls  this  a  mere  conjecture 
of  Dr.  Stillingticet,  without  any  authority  at  all ;  for  not  only  that  learned 
Doctor,  but  the  greatest  Antiquaries  before  him,  and  particularly  Archbishop 
Usher,  and  his  own  Selden  believed  it  as  a  most  certain  truth,  upon  the 
testimony  of  S.  Athanasius,  in  his  Second  Apology.     But  that  I  may  deal 
frankly  and  ingenuously,  tho  the  Latin  Version  of  Athanasius  in  that  place 
does  expressly  say  so,  yet  the  Original  seems  to  contain  no  more  than  that 
above  Three  Hundred  Bishops  of  Britain,  and  the  other  Provinces  which  are 
named  there,  did  approve,  by  their  Suffrages,  the  Decree  that  had  been 
formerly  made  by  the  Council  of  Sardica  in  favour  of  S.  Athanasius.     And 
this  is  sufficient  to  our  purpose.     The  present  argument  is  not  concerned, 
whether  there  were  British  Bishops  present  or  not  at  the  Council  of  Sardica  ; 
it  is  enough  if  there  were  Bishops  in  the  British  Church  at  that  time.     And 
this  is  evident  both  from  the  Second  Apology  and  the  other  known  testi 
mony  of  Athanasius,  in  his  Epistle  ad  Solitariam  Yitam  Agentes.     The 
authority  of  Hilarius  Pictaviensis  is  most  clear  and  evident,  who,  in  his 
Book  de  Syuodis,  Published  Anno  358,  salutes  the  Bishops  of  Britain,  as 
well  as  those  of  his  own  Country,  and  addresses  his  Book  to  both.     Cer 
tainly  S.  Hilary,  being  a  Gallican  Bishop,  and  having  lived  so  long  near  to 
Britain,  could  not  have  been  mistaken  concerning  the  Government  of  the 
Church  there.     Sulpitius  Severus  relates  a  very  remarkable  passage  con 
cerning  three  British  Bishops  who  were  present  at  the  Council  of  Ariininum,  BritiBhBishopg 
Anno  359  ;  and  Sir  James  himself  is  forced  to  yield  to  the  evidence  of  this  at 
testimony,  tho  it  quite  destroys  his  fond  opinion  ; — not  to  mention  a  great 
number  of  other  British  Bishops,  who  can  be  proved  to  have  been  Diocesan 
from  most  authentic  Documents.     I  shall  not  insist  much  upon  the  two 

VOL.  II.  3  II 


420  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

Bishops  from  Britain,  who  were  present  at  the  Council  in  Borne,  Anno  721, 
under  Gregory  II.,  of  which  the  one  Signed  thus — Sedulius  Britanniae 
Episcopns  do  Genere  Scotorum  ;  and  the  other  Subscribed  himself — Fergus- 
tus  Pictus  Scotia}  Episcopus. 

The  Scottish  ^ut    ^   proceed   to   make   some   short    Reflections  upon  the    Scottish 

Bislups  who  Bishops,  who  were  Consecrated  by  the  Scots,  and  sent  into  South  Britain. 
South^Britain.  Were,  not  Aidan,  Finaii,  and  Colman  Diocesan  Bishops,  who  had  their 
Episcopal  Scat  in  Lindisfarn  or  Holy  Island  ?  King  Oswald  having  been 
instructed  in  the  Christian  Faith,  and  Baptized  by  the  Scots,  must  needs  be 
supposed,  according  to  Sir  James'  hypothesis,  to  have  been  as  much  an 
enemy  to  Episcopacy,  and  especially  to  Diocesan  Episcopacy,  as  themselves  ; 
and,  therefore,  how  could  it  enter  into  his  thoughts  to  desire  a  Bishop  at 
all  ?  Or,  if  this  could  be  accounted  for,  what  could  move  him  to  demand 
a  Bishop  from  those  whom  he  knew  had  none  of  that  Order  among  them  ? 
And  if  Aidan,  a  man  of  most  singular  piety  and  conduct,  did  so  far  revolt 
from  the  Principles  and  Practices  of  his  Mother- Church  as  to  become  a 
Diocesan  Bishop,  why  did  the  Scots  after  his  Death  Consecrate  and  send 
Finan  to  succeed  him  in  the  same  unlawful  Office  and  Character;  and 
again,  after  this  Bishop's  Death,  Colman  ?  Certainly  it  is  impossible  to 
account  for  all  or  any  of  these  things  upon  the  supposition  that  the  Scots 
were  enemies  to  Diocesan  Episcopacy.  On  the  contrary,  these  holy  Bishops 
of  Lindisfarn  seem  to  have  copied  from  the  Pattern  of  the  Scottish  Churches 
in  this  as  well  as  in  their  manner  of  living ;  for  Bcde  assures  us  that  they 
Bishops  living  and  their  Clergy  resided  in  a  Monastery  together  with  the  Abbot  and  his 
in  Monasteries.  Monks,  which  custom  continued  there  for  many  years,  at  least  to  the  Death 
of  Cuthbert,  Bishop  of  that  See.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  (as  Bede  also 
informs  us)  the  Abbots  and  Monks  of  Holy  Island  were  under  the  Jurisdic 
tion  of  the  Bishop ;  and  thence,  perhaps,  some  may  be  ready  to  conclude 
that  so  far  they  deviated  from  the  Institutions  of  their  Mother-Church,  since 
the  same  Author  shews  that  the  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of  Hyi  or  Icolmldl, 
who  Avas  no  more  than  a  Priest,  had  not  only  Jurisdiction  over  the  whole 
Province,  but  also,  by  an  unusual  and  singular  custom,  was  superior  to  the 
Bishops  themselves.  But  tho  it  were  certain  that  Bedc  was  not  mistaken 
in  this  particular  relation,  as  he  has  been  in  several  matters  relating  to  the 
Scottish  Nation,  yet  it  cannot  be  inferred  from  this  that  the  Scots  did  not 
A  Bishop  believe  the  superiority  of  the  Episcopal  Office  above  that  of  a  Priest.  All 
tliat  can  k°  couclucled  from  it  with  any  reason  is,  that  a  Bishop,  considered 
as  a  Monk  or  a  Member  of  that  Religious  House,  was  to  be  subject  to  the 
Abbot  or  Superior  of  the  Society.  No  man  will  deny  but  that  the  Church 
of  England  acknowledges  the  Episcopal  Character  to  be  Superior  to  the 
Order  of  Priests  ;  and  yet  when  a  Bishop  is  Head  of  a  College  in  any  of  the 
Universities  (which  has  frequently  happened),  he  must  be  subject  to  the 
Jurisdiction  of  the  Vice -Chancellor,  tho  only  a  Priest,  and  perhaps  one  of 
his  own  Clergy.  Archbishop  Usher  has  shown  from  the  Ulster  Annals  that 
tho  S.  Columba  was  the  Founder  and  first  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of  Hyi, 


JOHN  SAGE.  427 

yet  there  was  always  a  Bishop  who  had  his  ordinary  residence  with  him. 
And  this  gives  me  occasion  to  offer  a  conjecture,  which  seems  to  me  highly 
probable,  concerning  the  true  reading  of  Episcopus  Myiensis,  who  Sub 
scribed  the  Canons  drawn  up  in  the  Northumbrian  Synod,  which  were 
afterwards  presented  to  the  Synod  of  Calcuith,  Anno  787,  according  to 
Spelman,  Dr.  Cave,  and  others  ;  or  Anno  785,  according  to  the  Saxon 
Chronicle,  and  the  most  ingenious  and  learned  Mr.  Collier.  The  matter 
was  this  :  Gregory,  Bishop  of  Ostia,  and  Theophylact,  Bishop  of  Todi,  were  go'J  and  Tlfeo- 


sent  by  Pope  Adrian  into  Britain,  with  the  Character  of  Legates;  one  of  phylact  sent 
them  travelled  into  the  Kingdom  of  the  Northumbrians,  and  was  present  at 
a  Synod  where  several  Canons  were  Subscribed  by  Alfwold  the  King, 
Eanboldus,  Bishop  of  York,  Five  other  Bishops,  and  the  Nobility  and 
Inferior  Clergy;  and  these  Canons  were  afterwards  presented  by  the  Legates 
to  the  Synod  of  Calcuith,  in  the  Kingdom  of  the  Mercians,  where  were 
present  King  Off  a,  Lambert,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  the  other 
Bishops  of  that  Province.  Now,  no  less  than  six  Bishops  Subscribed  to  the 
Northumbrian  Synod,  and  yet  it  is  certain  there  were  at  most  no  more  than 
Four  Sees  in  all  that  Kingdom  —  viz.,  York,  Liudisfarn  or  Holy  Island, 
Hagulstad  or  Hexam,  Candida  Casa  or  AVhithern  in  Galloway  ;  and  some 
will  not  allow  this  last  to  have  been  at  that  time  under  the  Northumbrian 
King,  or  subject  to  the  Metropolitan  of  York.  Sir  Henry  Spelman  and 
other  very  learned  men  are  therefore  of  opinion  that  some  of  the  Bishops 
from  Scotland  were  present  at  the  Northumbrian  Synod.  Their  great 
difficulty  is  where  to  place  Adulfus,  who  Signs  himself  Episcopus  Myiensis 
Ecclesia1,  since  there  is  no  such  place  to  be  met  with  either  in  Scotland  or 
England.  But  for  my  part  I  am  fully  persuaded  that  the  Transcriber  has 
mistaken  Myiensis  for  Hyiensis  Ecclesiie,  as  he  has  certainly  mistaken 
Dilberch  Episcopus  Augustadensis  for  Hagulstadensis  Ecclesia\  If  so,  then 
we  have  had  at  least  one  Bishop  from  Scotland  in  the  Eighth  Century,  a 
Diocesan  Bishop,  nay  a  Bishop  of  Hyi  or  Icolmkil.  And  that  S.  Columba,  Bishoplifthe 
who  was  a  famous  and  holy  man,  believed  the  Superiority  of  a  Bishop  above  Eisllth  Cen- 
a  Priest,  is  evident  from  that  remarkable  Passage  which  we  have  in  his 
Life,  written  by  Adamnanus,  whose  authority  is  far  preferable  in  this  affair, 
even  to  that  of  the  venerable  Bede,  since  he  had  better  opportunity  of  being 
acquainted  with  the  Sentiments  and  Practices  of  S.  Columba  than  Bede 
had,  having  been  Abbot  of  the  same  Monastery  of  Icolmkil,  and  at  the  time 
when  Bede  was  but  a  child.  The  Story  is  this  in  short  :  A  certain  Bishop 
came  to  Hyi,  who  being  willing  to  conceal  his  character,  and  pass  for  a 
Priest  only,  affecting  a  more  than  ordinary  submission  and  modesty,  upon 
the  Lord's  Day  Columba  desired  him  to  assist  at  the  Consecration  of  the 
Eucharist  ;  but  when  the  stranger  came  up  to  the  Altar  to  break  the  Holy 
Bread,  as  the  custom  of  that  place  was,  and  two  Priests  were  at  Church 
together,  Columba  looking  stedfastly  on  him,  and  discovering  his  character,  A  Scottish 
desired  him  to  make  use  of  the  Privilege  of  his  Order  by  breaking  the  Bread  secratmg.°n 
alone  ;  "  for,"  says  he,  "  we  know  that  you  are  a  Bishop  :  why,  therefore, 


428  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

have  you  endeavoured  to  conceal  yourself,  and  hinder  us  all  from  treating 
you  with  due  respect  and  veneration'?"  Thus  S.  Columba's  opinion  of  the 
Superiority  of  a  Bishop  to  a  Priest  is  plain  and  evident  from  that  remark 
able  Passage  we  have  in  his  Life,  written  by  the  above  cited  Author ;  and  it 
likewise  demonstrates  that  there  were  Bishops  elsewhere  in  Scotland  besides 
him,  who  had  his  ordinary  Residence  in  the  Monastery  of  Hyi ;  yet  such 
Bishops  as  were  altogether  strangers  to  S.  Columba  and  his  Monks,  and 
consequently  who  never  had  received  Consecration  from  them. 

As  to  the  other  Paradox  advanced  by  Sir  James,  viz.,  that  the  Culdees 
the  CuKtecs11  Prcscrvc^  anc^  publickly  professed  the  Christian  Faith  pure  and  unspotted 
from  the  Piomish  Corruptions,  even  to  the  beginning  of  the  Fourteenth 
Century;  tho  indeed  it  were  to  be  Avishcd  that  he  or  any  other  Author  were 
able  to  prove  it  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  ingenious,  \ct  it  is  supported  by  no 
arguments  that  have  the  least  shadow  of  probability.  Sir  James  says  that 
the  Ancient  Scots  had  no  regard  to  the  Christian  Religion  planted  among 
the  Saxons  by  Augustine,  the  Piomish  Missionary,  and  his  followers.  But  the 
contrary  is  certainly  true,  that  the  Scots  and  Britons  believed  the  same 
Faith  with  the  Romans  ;  and  at  the  coining  of  Augustine  into  Britain,  and  for 
a  long  time  thereafter,  differed  in  nothing  from  the  Church  of  Home  but 
only  in  the  observation  of  Easter  and  a  few  Rites  and  Ceremonies.  This  is 
clear  from  Bede,  Avho  assures  us  that  Augustine  demanded  no  more  from 
the  British  Bishops  but  that  they  should  keep  Easter  and  administer  Bap 
tism  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Romish  Church,  and  Preach  the  Word 
of  God  together  with  him,  i.e.,  own  him  as  their  Archbishop,  and  conse 
quently  the  Bishop  of  Borne  as  the  Patriarch  of  the  whole  Western  Church  ; 
for  the  Pope  had  not  as  yet  claimed  the  supremacy  over  the  whole  Catholick 
Ancient  Scots  Church,  lie  knew  they  embraced  the  same  Faith  with  himself,  and  there- 
holding  the  f01-e  required  no  other  terms  from  them  but  those  already  mentioned,  and 
'  told  them  he  would  contentedly  bear  with  the  disagreement  of  their  Customs 
in  other  cases.  Honorius  the  Pope,  in  his  Letter  to  the  Scots,  blames  them 
for  nothing  but  their  uncanonical  observation  of  Easter.  John,  Elect  Pope, 
in  his  Letter  to  the  Scottish  Bishops,  Priests,  and  Abbots,  takes  notice  that 
some  in  their  Province  were  endeavouring  to  renew  the  old  Heresy  about  the 
keeping  of  Easter,  contrary  to  the  Orthodox  Faith.  He  calls  this  a  Heresy, 
having  in  his  view  the  Quartodecirnaui,  and  the  Censure  passed  upon  them 
by  the  Church,  after  the  determination  of  the  Controversy  in  the  Nicene 
Council.  He  also  laments  the  revival  of  the  Pelagian  Heresy  among  them, 
and  pathetically  exhorts  them  to  forsake  it.  In  all  other  points  of  Faith 
there  was  an  exact  conformity  with  the  Church  of  Rome.  If  the  Scots  had 
entertained  any  Errors  in  Faith,  Bede  would  have  been  far  from  bestowing 
Bede's  praise  so  great  praises  and  characters  on  the  Scottish  Bishops  who  planted  the 
GosPel  iu  Northumberland  and  other  places  of  England,  and  lived  in  the 
Communion  of  the  Scottish  and  British  Bishops,  and  Died  under  that 
distinction.  If  that  Author  had  thought  them  Hereticks,  would  he  have 
been  at  so  much  pains  to  have  represented  King  Oswald  and  Bishop  Aidan 


.JOHN  SAGE.  -120 

to  have   been  far  above  the   ordinary   rate   of  Saints  ?     Would   he   have 
insisted  so  much  on  their  Gift  of  Prophecy,  and  the  Miracles  wrought  by 
them  when  alive,  and  the  Cures  performed  by  the  Touch  of  their  Relicks, 
and  the  very  Dust  where  they  lay?     He  does,  indeed,  call  Aidan  a  man  of 
the  greatest  meekness,  piety,  and  moderation,  and  at  the  same  time  one 
who  had  a  zeal  for  God,  altho  not  altogether  according  to  knowledge  ;  but 
then  the  only  reason  he  gives  why  he  added  the  restriction,  is  no  other, 
but  because  he  observed  Easter,  according  to  the  Custom  of  his  Country, 
from  the  14th  day  of  the  Moon  to  the  20th.     And  here  I  beg  leave,  in  a  few 
words,  to  discover  a  general  mistake  into  which  a  great  number  of  very 
learned  men  have  fallen,  who  thought  that  the  Scots  and  Britons  agreed  with 
the  Ancient  Asiatick  Churches  in  the  keeping  of  Easter.     It  is  certain  and 
beyond  all  Controversy,  that  the  Churches  of  Asia  observed  that  High  and 
Solemn  Festival  precisely  on  the  same  day  with  the  Jewish  Passover,  viz.,  the  The  observa- 
14th  day  of  the  Moon,  whether  it  happened  to  be  Sunday  or  not ;  whereas  the  tion  of  Easter< 
Scots  and  Britons  always  observed  Easter  upon  a  Sunday,  as  is  evident  from 
seven  or  eight  Passages  in  '•  Bede's  Ecclesiastical  History."     The  difference 
between  the  Romish  and  Scottish  Customs  of  keeping  this  Festival  consisted 
in  two  things.     The  Church  of  Pome  had  established  the  8th  of  March  and 
the  15th  of  April  inclusively,  as  the  limits  and  bounds  of  the  Paschal  New 
Moons  ;  and  if  the  14th  day  of  the  Paschal  Moon  chanced  to  happen  on  the 
21st  of  March,  or  the  day  of  the  Equinox,  then  they  observed  Easter,  not 
on  that  day,  but  on  the  following  Sunday,  lest  in  this  case  they  should 
agree  with  the  Jews  and  Quartodecimani ;  so  that  they  reckoned  from  the 
15th  day  of  the  Moon  to  the  21st  inclusively.     But,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Scots,  tho  they  observed  Easter  always  and  only  on  a  Sunday,  yet  when  the 
14th  day  of  the  month  fell  upon  a  Sunday,  they  did  not  put  off  Easter  to 
that  day  seven-night,  as  the  Romanists  did,  but  observed  it  from  the  very 
day,  computing  from  the  14th  to  the  20th  day  of  the  Moon  inclusively. 
And  this   accounts  very  well  for  what  Bedc  tells   us,  that  it   sometimes 
happened  that  Easter  was  observed  twice  in  one  year;  and  that  when  King 
Oswi  was  keeping  that  Festival,  his  Queen,  who  was  of  the  Roman  Com 
munion,  on  the  same  day  was  celebrating  Palm  Sunday ;   for  the  14th  day 
of  the  Paschal  Month  fell  that  year  on  Sunday,  which  was  kept  by  the  Scots 
as  Easter ;   whereas  the  Romanists,  according  to  their  Rule,  put  it  off  till 
the   Sunday  after.      Ceolfridus,   Abbot  of  Weremouth,   insinuates,   in  his 
Letter  (apud  Bcdc,  lib.  5,  cap.  22)  to  Xaitanus,  King  of  the  Picts,  that  at 
that  time,  Anno  699,  there  were  some  who  kept  Easter  from  the  IGtli  day  of 
the  Moon  to  the  22nd.     Another  difference  arose  from  the  different  Lunar  The  Lunar 
Cycles,  used  by  them  for  determining  the  New  Moons ;  for  the  Scots  (as 
Bede  in  many  places  assures  us)  used  a  Cycle  of  84  years ;   and  'tis  highly 
probable  that  the  Roman  Church  itself  used  the  same  until  the  beginning  of 
the   Sixth   Century,  when  Dionysius  Exiguus  introduced  the  Alexandrian 
Cycle  of  19  years,  which  by  degrees  obtained  in  all  the  Western  Churches. 
Nothing  can  be  plainer,  from  Saint  Ambrose's  Letter  to  the  Bishops  of 


•130  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

/Emilia,  and  the  Testimonies  of  Paschasinus  Victorius  and  Diouysius 
Exiguus,  than  that  the  Latins  made  no  use  of  any  Cycle  of  19  years  before 
the  time  of  Leo  the  Great.  Xay,  'tis  certain  that  in  Pope  Gregory  the  First's 
time  several  Churches  in  Communion  with  Home  retained  as  yet  the  old 
Cycle  of  84  years.  Whoever  is  curious  may  sec  a  learned  Dissertation  on 
this  Cycle  by  Cardinal  Xorris,  Published  with  his  "  Epochrc  Annorum  Syro- 
Macedonum."  But  those  who  would  understand  exactly  the  use  of  it,  as 
observed  by  the  Ancient  Latin  Church,  may  consult  the  incomparable  and 
ever-famous  Mr.  Dodwell,  in  his  admirable  Work,  "Dc  Cyclis  Vcterum." 

But  to  return  to  the  subject  whence  I  digressed.     In  the  Year  710,  the 

Scots  in  Icolmkil,  with  all  the  Monasteries  subject  to  them,  were  persuaded 

The  Scots         by  Egbert  to  comply  with  the  Romish  Tonsure,  and  the  other  Catholick 

comply  to  tliG    s~\  £  T  *    *  TIT 

Komish  Cus-  :oms  ot  -Laving,  as  Lede  expresses  it ;  and  this  can  imply  110  less  than 

that  they  submitted  at   the  same  time  to  the  authority  of  the  Bishop  of 
liomc,  especially  when  the  venerable  Author  adds  that  Egbert  Consecrated 
the  Island  of  Kyi  to  Christ,  by  enlightening  it  with  certain  new  Blessings, 
and  the  Grace  of  Ecclesiastical  Unity  and  Peace;   and  the  Bishops  from 
Scotland,  who  were  present  in  the  Northumbrian  Synod,  Anno  785,  or  787, 
declared,  with  the  rest  of  the  Synod,  that  they  were  ready  to  submit  to  the 
directions  of  the  See  of  Home.     However,  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than 
that  the  Scots  and  Britons  Avere  altogether  of  the  same  Faith  and  Religion 
with  the  Piomanists,  tho  they  had  differed  from  them  in  some  few  Rituals, 
before  the  year  710.     Now,  will  not  Sir  -James  own  that  several  Corruptions 
Corruptions  in  na(l  crept  into  the  Roman  and  other  Western  Churches  in  and  before  the 
the  Churches.    Seventh  Century?     Nay,  we  have  most  plain  instances  in  Bede  of  several 
Errors  and  Opinions  introduced  into  the  Churches  of  this  Island,  some  of 
which  are  rejected  by  all  Protestants,  and  all  of  them  condemned  by  our 
Presbyterians  as  run/,-  l'<>/>cri/,  if  I  may  use  their  own  Phrase — such  as  the 
Popish  Doctrine  of  Purgatory,  Private  Confession,  Prayers  for  the  Dead,  and 
the  Souls  being  freed  from  Purgatory  before  the  Day  of  Judgment  by  the 
Alms  and  Fastings  of  the  Living,  and  especially  by  Masses  ;  all  which  are 
to  be  seen  in  the  Vision  of  Drithelmus,  a  Monk  of  Melross,  and  the  Explica 
tion  of  it.     Ceolfridus   seems  to   have   believed  that  the  Eucharist  was  a 
Propitiatory  Sacrifice.     The  Christians  in  Britain,  and  even  those  of  the 
Scottish  Communion,  had  no  less  regard  and  veneration  for  Reliqucs  than 
the  Romanists  have  now,  and  believed  that  Miracles  were  done  by  them,  of 
which  Bcde  gives  us  very  many  instances.     They  Consecrated  Churches, 
and  for  this  end  used  Holy  Water,  which  also   served  to   cure  Diseases. 
Churches  were  dedicated  to  the  honour  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  Apostles, 
and  the  Reliques  of  the  Apostles  were  sought  for  from  all  places,  and  Altars 
built  in  honour  of  them.     They  used  Holy  Oyl,  by  which  the  raging  of  the 
sea  and  roaring  of  the  winds  were   calmed.     They  observed  Lent  most 
religiously,  and  used  the  Sign  of  the  Cross. 

But  what  need  is  there  for  insisting  farther  on  this  head  ?     Do  not  the 
very  things  in  which  the  Scottish  Church  differed  from  the  Roman  make  it 


JOHN   SAGE.  431 

a  corrupt  Church,  in  the  opinion  of  our  Presbyterians '?     They  cannot  call  Presbyterians 
that  a  pure  Church  which  observed  Popish  Holy  Days,  such  as  Easter,  and  and  the  Scot- 
so  much  encouraged  and  reverenced  Visionary  Monks,  and  made  so  much 
work  about  a  particular  Form  of  Superstitious  Tonsure  ;  for  the  Scottish 
Monks  had  a  Tonsure,  tho  different  from  the  Pioman.     But  tho  the  opposi 
tion  which  was  made  by  the  Scots  and  Britons  for  many  years  to  the  Pope's 
claim,  who  at  first  pretended  to  be  their  Superior  only  as  Patriarch  of  the 
West,  but  afterwards  as  Supreme  Visible  Head  of  the  Catholick  Church, 
might  betray  unwary  persons  to  think  that  they  were  altogether  free  in  the 
Sixth  and  Seventh  Centuries  from  the  Errors  of  the  Pioman  Church  ;  yet  it 
cannot  but  be  strange  and  astonishing  to  see  a  learned  Gentleman,  who  has 
justly  obtained  a  great  reputation  for  his  knowledge  in  the  Antiquities  and 
Records  of  his  Country  :  I  say,  it  must  be  very  surprising  to  see  so  ingenious 
an  Author  asserting  that  the    Scottish  Culdees  continued   to   oppose   the 
Innovations  of  the  Romish  Church,  even  to  the  beginning  of  the  Fourteenth 
Century,  and  shrewdly  insinuating  that  they  were  enemies  to  Episcopacy 
itself.     Sir  James  has  indeed  sufficiently  proved  against  the  Bishop  of  S. 
Asaph    and   Dr.    Stillingllect,    that    there   were    Culdees   not  only   at    St. 
Andrews,  but  in  many  other  places  of  Scotland,  as  Abernethy,  Dunkeld,  Culdees  in 
Kirkaldy,  Lochleven,  Monimusk,  £c.     He  hath  also  made  it  plain  that  they  many  places 
continued  after  the  year  1297,  when  tho  Culdees  of  St.  Andrews  lost  the  ° 
power,  which  they  formerly  had,  of  Electing  the  Bishop.     He  has  also  given 
instances  how  they  opposed  themselves  to  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews  and 
others,  when  they  endeavoured  to  deprive  them  of  their  Lands,  and  divest 
them  of  their  Privileges,  and  give  them  away  to  Canons  or  Monks  of  a  later 
Institution.     But  he  has  not  brought  one  shadow  of  an  Argument  to  prove 
that  they  renounced  the  Pope's  authority,  and  the  other  Corruptions  of  the 
Romish  Church  ;  unless  he  thinks  that  to  be  one  which  he  brings  from 
Richard,  Prior  of  Hexam  de  Bello  Standardi,  page  82-1— '•  Illi  vero  diu  a 
Cisalpina,   imo   fere   ab   Universa  Ecclesia  discordantes,  exoser  memoriae 
Petro  Leoni  et  Apostasirc  ejus  minium  favisse  videbantur,"  £c.,  where  Sir 
James  says  there  is  a  plain  acknowledgment  that  the  Scottisli  Nation,  both 
Clergy  and  Laity,  had  been  a  long  time  in  Schism  and  Discord  with  the 
Cisalpin,  and  almost  witli  the  Universal  Church,  that  is,  with  the  Romish 
Church.     But  if  this  proves  any  thing,  it  proves  too  much,  even  that  not 
only  the  Culdees,  but  also  the  King,  Bishops,  Abbots,  Priors,  and  Barons  of 
Scotland,  of  whom  Richard  speaks  in  that  Passage,  did  separate  from  the 
Romish  Church.     The  whole  of  the  matter,  in  short,  is  this  : — After  the 
Death  of  Pope  Honorius  II.,  a  new  Schism  broke  out  at  Rome.    The  friends 
of  the  late  Pope  chose  Gregory,  Cardinal-Deacon  of  Saint  Angelo,  who  took  Rome, 
the  name  of  Innocent  II.     Another  party  made  choice  of  Peter,  a  Cardinal- 
Priest,  and  son  to  Leo,  a  Roman  Prince,  who  took  the  name  of  Anacletus 
II.     The  Scots  favoured  the  last,  or  rather  stood  neuter  and  unresolved  for 
some  time,  as  did  also  the  English,  until  the  famous  Bernard,  who  espoused 
the  cause  of  Innocent,  very  warmly  brought  over  the  French,  English,  and 


432  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

Scots  to  his  side.  Now,  will  any  infer  from  this  that  the  whole  Nation  of 
the  Scots  renounced  the  Errors  of  the  Roman  Church  ?  as  Sir  James 
insinuates  in  these  words,  p.  258 — "  Besides  the  Scottish  Church  there  were 
great  multitudes  in  Italy  itself,  France,  Germany,  and  Flanders,  who  differed 
from  the  Romish  Church,  not  in  Pates  and  smaller  matters,  but  in  the 
Doctrines  concerning  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  other  points 
of  Faith,  and  renounced  their  Communion,  and  erected  Churches  separate 
from  Rome."  Certainly,  all  who  have  the  least  acquaintance  with  History 
know  that  the  Scots  believed  all  the  Articles  of  the  Romish  Faith  as  much 
when  they  seemed  to  favour  Anaclctus  II.  as  they  did  after  their  submission 
to  Innocent  II.  They  believed  that  the  Bishop  of  Rome  was  Vicar  of 
The  Scottish  Christ,  and  Supreme  Visible  Head  of  the  Catliolick  Church  ;  and  the  only 
question  was,  Whether  of  the  two  Competitors  was  the  lawful  and  duly 
Elected  Pope  ?  In  a  word,  the  Scots,  by  Sir  James'  own  Confession,  had 
Diocesan  Bishops  some  hundreds  of  years  before  the  Extirpation  of  the 
Culdees.  Both  our  Kings  and  Bishops,  and  the  whole  body  of  the  Nation, 
had  submitted  to  the  Pope's  Supremacy,  received  their  Bulls,  and  obeyed 
their  Legates ;  and  in  Doctrine,  Worship,  and  Discipline  perfectly  agreed 
with  the  Church  of  Rome.  Yea,  our  Latinized  Bishops  (as  Sir  James  calls 
them)  were  chosen  for  many  years  by  these  very  Culdees,  whom  he  makes 
the  stout  Defenders  of  Purity  and  Orthodoxy;  and  Gregorius,  Abbot  of  the 
Culdees  of  Dunkeld,  was  made  Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  and,  according  to  Sir 
James,  the  first  Diocesan  Bishop  there.  But  this  fiction  is  therefore  most 
ridiculous  and  absurd. 

Another  design          I  shall  only  mention  one  other  Subject  upon  which  the  famous  Mr. 

Mr.  Sage  had  Sage  resolved  to  have  employed  his  accurate  and  learned  pen  ;  and  that  is — 
The  Rise  and  History  of  the  Commission  of  the  General  Assembly.  How 
far  he  proceeded  in  this  design,  I  cannot  indeed  tell;  but  I  am  sure  an 
impartial  and  distinct  Account  of  that  pretended  Ecclesiastick  Court,  such 
as  we  might  have  expected  from  that  excellent  man,  would  tend  very  much 
to  the  advantage  and  interest  of  this  afilicted  Church,  seeing  it  is  plain  that 
the  Commission  of  Assembly,  though  a  Judicatory  founded  on  no  Law,  and 
never  established  by  any  Act  of  Parliament,  has  done  by  far  more  hurt  and 
injustice  than  ever  the  Assemblies  themselves  were  able  to  do. 

As  long  as  Mr.  Sage  Avas  able  to  read  or  pursue  his  Studies,  he  was 
careful  to  have  in  his  view  one  or  other  of  those  subjects,  concerning  which 
he  had  proposed  to  write  ;  but  some  weeks  before  his  Death  he  grew  so  very 

His  increasing  -\veak  that  he  could  not  apply  himself  closely  to  any  thing,  nor  so  much 
as  write  a  Letter  to  a  friend,  without  great  difficulty.  His  distemper 
was  lingering,  and  came  slowly  and  gradually  on ;  but  tho  his  body  grew 
weaker,  yet  he  still  kept  his  good  humour,  and  his  conversation  was  pleasant 
and  entertaining.  The  night  before  he  died,  when  one  of  his  friends  was 
condoling  his  afflicted  condition,  he  made  this  reply  to  him — "Ye  need  not 
be  troubled  about  me  ;  I  am  as  free  of  all  uneasiness  as  yourself  is.  I  thank 


JOHN  SAGE.  433 

God  I  have  neither  pain  of  body  nor  trouble  of  mind  ;  though,  at  the  same 

time,  I  am  very  sensible  that  I  am  posting  to  Eternity,  but  not  after  the 

ordinary  manner  of  Posters,  who  ride  fast  the  first  day  and  slower  before 

they  come  to  the  end  of  their  journey;  but  I  post  twice  as  swiftly  this  day 

as  I  did  the  former."     And  with  the  same  indolency  of  body  and  tranquillity 

of  mind,  his  senses  remaining  entire  to  the  very  last  minute  of  his  life,  he 

Died  at  Edinburgh  the  7th  of  June,  1711  (the  same  day  the  famous  and  h 

learned  Mr.  Dodwell  departed  this  life),  in  the  Fear  of  God,  in  the  Unity  of 

the  Church,  and  in  Peace  with  all  the  World,  to  the  great  grief  of  all  good 

and  learned  men,  and  the  infinite  loss  of  this  Nation  and  Church.     His 

constant  friend,  the  Right  Reverend  Father  in  God  the  Lord  Bishop  of 

Edinburgh,   performed   the   last  duties  to   him,   and   he  was   honourably 

interred  in  the  Grey-Friars  Church-Yard  in  that  City. 

He  was  a  man  of  excellent  natural  parts  and  endowments,  which  he 
cultivated  by  close  application  and  study,  notwithstanding  all  the  disadvan 
tages  and  bad  circumstances  he  lay  under  for  the  most  part  of  his  life.  He  piishments. 
understood  exactly  the  Belles  Lettrcs,  and  could  have  written  in  the  Latin 
Language  better  than  the  most  of  his  Cotemporaries,  if  the  occasions 
of  the  Church  had  not  obliged  him  to  write  in  the  Vulgar  Tongue,  for 
instructing  and  confirming  those  of  his  own  Communion,  and  opposing  and 
convincing  gainsayers.  lie  was  well  versed  in  pure  and  primitive  antiquity, 
and  had  read  with  great  exactness  the  Histories  of  his  own  and  other 
Countries,  and  spoke  and  reasoned  very  handsomely  about  them  as  occasion 
offered.  His  excellent  and  elaborate  Writings  are  a  sufficient,  and  will  be 
an  eternal,  Monument  of  his  vast  Genius,  sharp  "Wit,  and  solid  Judgment. 
His  piety  was  sincere  and  unaffected,  without  the  least  mixture  either  of 
melancholy,  peevishness,  enthusiasm,  or  superstition.  The  whole  conduct 
of  his  life  was  truly  Christian  and  prudent,  and  his  conversation  was  just, 
instructive,  and  pleasant.  His  greatest  diversion  was  to  discourse  with 
sensible  people,  of  whose  conversation  lie  was  very  desirous.  None  was 
more  communicative  of  his  knowledge.  He  suited  his  Discourses  to  the 
meanest  capacities ;  and  in  reasoning  with  his  friends  he  gave  their  objec 
tions  against  them  their  utmost  weight,  without  taking  any  advantage  if 
they  had  not  expressed  themselves  so  correctly  as  they  ought.  He  defended 
the  Church  strenuously  and  learnedly  with  his  pen,  in  its  low  condition ; 
and  was  fit  to  have  governed  it  in  its  highest  Post,  if  it  had  pleased  God  to 
restore  it  to  peace  and  tranquillity.  In  a  word,  he  was  one  of  the  most 
religious,  most  learned,  and  wisest  men  of  his  time,  worthy  to  be  remem 
bered,  honoured,  and  imitated  by  all  good  men. 

Semper  honoratum  (We  D/7  voluistis)  habebo. 

This  Manuscript  of  Mr.  Sage's  Life,  which  was  written  in  the  year  1711, 
having  been  sent  me  from  Scotland,  to  be  Printed  here  at  London,  I 
think  it  not  amiss  to  subjoin  a  Letter  which  I  had  from  him  upon  two 

VOL.  II.  3  I 


434  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

different  subjects,  and  which,  indeed,  I  had  importuned  him  to  write  to 
mo  ;  because,  in  conversation,  I  had  heard  him  say  some  things  which 
I  thought  wore  very  material.  He  was  a  man  of  such  integrity  and 
veracity  that  his  accounts  of  Facts,  as  related  to  him,  were  always  to 
be  depended  upon.  I  therefore  here  present  the  Reader  with  a  true 
Copy  of  that  Letter  I  had  from  him,  which  bears  Date  17th  October, 
1709. 

BUCHANAN. 

Sir, — About  twenty-eight  years  ago,  I  had  occasion,  at  Mr.  Drummond 
of  Iimermey's  House  in  Strathern,  to  be  in  conversation  with  an  ancient 
Lady  (the  Lady  Rasyth,  in  Fife),  a  woman  of  very  bright  parts,  and  of  very 
good  principles.  She  was  a  daughter  of  the  House  of  Buchanan.  In  the 
process  of  our  discourse,  we  came  to  talk  of  the  famous  Mr.  George 
Buchanan.  I  told  her  I  had  not  long  before  read  over  Famianus  Strada's 
Book,  '-De  Bello  Belgico,"  and  had  found  in  it  (I  think  ad  Anintni  1580)  an 
Account  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  Confession,  when  on  his  Death-bed,  that  he  had 
been  most  injurious,  in  Papers  published  by  him,  to  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots, 
wishing  earnestly  that  God  would  allow  him  time  and  strength  before  he 
Died  to  do  her  justice.  I  added  that  the  Account  was  new  to  me  (for  I  had 
not  then  seen  Camdcn's  "Elizabeth"),  and  that  I  was  afraid  Strada  was 
partial,  having  many  other  things  in  his  Book  too  like  Romance,  and  that, 
therefore,  I  was  not  forward  to  believe  him  in  that  matter.  The  Lady 
forthwith  desired  me  to  take  her  word  for  it  that  it  was  a  certain  truth  ;  for 
she  remembered  nothing  better  than  that,  in  her  younger  years,  she  had 
oftener  than  once  heard  a  very  aged  man,  called  David  Buchanan,  who  was 
maintained  in  her  father's  family,  affirm  that  he  was  present  in  Mr. 
Buchanan's  Bed  Chamber,  and  an  car  witness  to  that  Confession  when  he 
made  it.  This,  so  far  as  my  memory  serves  me,  is  the  substance  of  what  I 
learned  of  that  Lady  at  that  time.  It  made  the  deeper  impression  on  me, 
when  I  reflected  on  the  time  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  Death,  which  was  in 
September,  1582 ;  at  which  time  David  Buchanan  might  have  been  very 
capable  to  consider  what  Mr.  George  said,  though  he  had  afterwards  lived 
after  the  year  1630,  or  1G3G  ;  and  about  that  time  the  Lady  was  capable  to 
have  received  it  from  him. 

MR.  ALEXANDER  HENDERSON. 

Mr.  Robert  Freebairn,  Archdeacon  of  Dumblane,  and  Minister  of  Gask, 
in  Strathern,  a  person  of  great  worth  and  integrity,  gave  me  this  following 
Account : — That  while  Mr.  Henderson  was  in  his  Decay,  of  which  he  Died, 
Mr.  John  Freebairn,  father  to  this  Mr.  Robert,  and  one  Mr.  Rue,  and 
another  minister,  whose  name  I  have  forgot,  went  together  to  visit  him. 
He,  the  said  Mr.  Robert  (who  was  then  a  Preacher),  went  along  with  them. 
After  some  other  things  had  passed  in  their  Discourse,  one  of  the  Ministers 


JOHN  SAGE.  435 

addressed  himself  to  Mr.  Henderson  to  this  purpose — "  That  now,  in  all  like 
lihood,  he  was  a  Dying ;  that  he  had  been  very  much  concerned  in   the 
Publick  Commotions  which  for  some  years  before  had  happened  in  Scotland; 
that  his  Testimony  (after  his  Death)  would  be  of  great  weight  with  all  those 
who  were  zealous  for  the  cause,  &c.;  that  therefore  it  was  very  proper  that 
he  should  lay  himself  open  to  those  who  were  then  present,  that  they  might 
be  in  a  condition  to  encourage  their  Brethren,"  etc.     To  which  Mr.  Hender 
son  composedly  and  deliberately  replied  to  this  purpose — "  That  he  had 
indeed  been  very  active  in  overturning  Episcopacy,  and  in  encouraging  the 
Rebellion ;  but  he  took  God  to  witness  that  he  proposed  nothing  to  himself 
when  he  began,  but  the  security  of  Religion  and  the  Kirk,  in  opposition  to 
Popery ;  which  he  was  made  to  believe  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  King's 
designs,  but  now  he  was  sensible  that  his  fears  were  groundless.     He  had 
had  opportunities  of  conversing  frequently  with  the  King,  and  he  was  fully 
satisfied  that  he  was  as  sincere  a  Protestant  as  was  in  his  Dominions.     He 
was  heartily  sorry,  and  humbly  begged  God's  Pardon  for  it,  that  he  had 
been  so  forward  in  a  course  so  unjustifiable  ;  and  that  if  it  should  please 
God  to  restore  him  to  health  and  strength,  he  would  go  no  farther  on  in 
that    course,   and  that  he  was  heartily  afraid  they  had  all  gone  too  far 
already.     The  only  advice  therefore  he  could  give  them  (and  he  entreated 
them  to  take  it  as  the  last  advice  of  a  dying  man),  was  that  they  should 
break  off  in  time,  for  they  had  gone  too  far  already.     Nothing  now  was  so 
proper  for  them,  as  to  retreat  and  return  to  their  duty  to  his  Majesty,  who 
was  the  learnedest,  the  most  candid  and  conscientious,  the  most  Religious, 
and  every  way  the  best  King  that  ever  did  sit  upon  a  Throne  in  Britain." 
This  his  Discourse  so  surprised  them,  that  for  some  time  they  sate  silent. 
At  length  one  of  them  (I  think  it  was  Mr.  Rue)  bespake  the  rest  of  them 
after  this  manner — "Brethren,  this  our  Brother  is  in  a  high  Fever,  and  is 
raving;  you  ought  not,  therefore,  to  heed  what  he  says/'     "No,"  said  Mr. 
Henderson,  "  I  am  very  weak  indeed,  but  I  am  not  at  all  raving.     Blessed 
be  God,  who  of  His  infinite  mercy  allows  the  use  of  my  reason  in  this  low 
Estate,   and  which  I  have   as  much  as  ever.     I  hope  I  have  spoken  no 
incoherencies,    and  what   I  have  said  I  will    say   over  again."     Then  ho 
resumed  what  he  had  said,  and  enlarged  upon  it,  and  desired  them,  in  the 
name  of  God,  to  believe  that  what  he  spake  was  from  his  heart,  and  with 
the  sincerity  and  seriousness  which  became  a  dying  person.    After  they  had 
taken  leave  of  him,  the  three  Ministers  enjoined  Mr.  Robert  Freebairn  a 
profound  silence  of  what  he  had  heard,  discharging  him  to  communicate  it 
to   any   person   whatsoever,   and    they   added   threatenings   also    to   their 
prohibition.     But   he  (as   he  told  me  himself)  boldly  told  them  that  he 
thought  himself  bound  in  conscience  to  declare  what  he  had  heard,  as  he 
had  occasion.    God's  glory  required  it ;  and  it  was  Mr.  Henderson's  purpose 
that  it  shall  be  propaled  and  propagated.     This  Account  I  had  oftener  than 
once  from  Mr.  Freebairn's  own  mouth.     He  Died  about  21  or  22  years  ago, 
aged  about  70.    I  am,  Sir,  yours,  &c.,  JOHN  SAGE. 


l-°'r>  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

The  foUmrimj  Inscription  /.v  In  !><•  j»/t  on  Mr.  Sftr/c'a  Mnuiiwcut : — 

MS. 

Hie  licli(jni;p  conduntur 

Vonerabilis  viri  JOAXXIS  SAGE, 
Honestis  potius  quam  Opulciitis  Parentibus  nati, 
Qui  oniiiia  sua  Incrcmonta  sibi  dcbuit, 
Suisquc  Moribus  sibi  fovtunam  finxit 

Vera  "\'irtuto  Xobilis, 
Sim,'  Opibus  et  fastuosis  Titulis  Clarus, 
Absquc  Pompa  et  Arrogantia  Doctus, 
Sine  fuco  ct  superstitione  Pius, 
Kcclosi.T  Scotiana.'  Presbyter  Meritissinius, 
In  Civitate  Glasguensi  Pastor  fulelissimus, 
in  Academia  Andrcana  SS.  Theoloj,'i;e 

Proi'rssor  designatus  : 
Sod,  proli  dolor  !  i'atali  temporum  injuria 
Xc  lioc  fuii^erctur  Munoro  probibitus. 
Ol)  minim  In^vnii  Acumen  et  solcrtiam, 
E \imiam  reruin  Pentiam  et  Prudentiam, 
Prsestantem  ]\[()rum  Gravitatem  et  suavitatem, 

JJonis  omnibus  Cams. 

Populum  quamdiu  licuit,  assiduc  Admouebat, 
Saluberrimis  Consiliis  Adjuvabat, 
Facuudissimis  Concionibus  Instruebat 
Eiquc  fulgentissimo  Pietatis  Excinplo  Prrelucebat 
Literas  (.awcas  optimc  Callebat, 
Tauta  crat  Latini  scrmonis  suavitas 
Ut  nativus  quidam  lepor  11011  adscitus  videretur. 
In  Historiis  tain  Sacris  quam  Profanis  apprime  Yersatus, 
Sacrosancta  Principum  Jura  coustantur  et  strcnue 

Difficilimis  ctiain  temporibus,  Asseruit. 
Ecclesiam  Xutantom,  ct  tantuni  non  Oppressam, 
Ore,  Consilio,  Scriptis,  tuebatur,  sustinuit,  suffulsit. 

Apostolicum  Ecclesiam  Picgimcn, 
Per  Episcopos,  Prcsbyteros,  ct  Diacoiios, 

Ex  scriptis  Cyprianicis, 
Et  reconditit  antiquitatis  Monumentis, 

Illustravit,  Propugnavit. 

Scliismata  et  ILereses  llepullulantes  Calanio  suo 
Erudito  Perstriugebat,  Xovatores  et  Fanaticos  liujus 
Scculi  Circmncelliones  contudit,  Debellavit. 

Ob  pntclara  in  Eempublicam  et  Ecclesiam  nierita, 
Dignus,  omnium  requi  amantium  judicio, 
Qui  non  solum  Cathedra  Academica, 
Sed  et  Sacra  Colionestaretur  insula. 
Tandem  studiis  et  laboribus  debilitatus, 
yErumnis  et  ffgritudiue  Confectus, 
Cam  tot  malis,  Ecclesire,  Patria3,  Sibique  luctuosis 

Diutius  superesse  nonpotuit, 

Placide  Obdorrnivit  in  Christo  Venerandus  Antistes, 
Anno  yEtatis  69.     .Eras  Christianas  1711. 


HENRY  CHRISTIE  AND  WILLIAM  IRVINE.  137 


HENRY  CHRISTIE,     A.D.  1709-18, 

Formerly  Priest  and  Pastor  of  Kinross.  Ho  was  the  intimate  and  dear 
friend  of  Bishop  Sage,  who  probably  recommended  him  for  the  Episcopate. 
He  and  Bishop  John  Falconar  of  Carnbec  were  Consecrated  at  Dundee  on 
the  28th  April,  1709.  Very  little  is  known  about  him  except  his  unobtru 
sive  meekness,  retirement,  and  piety.  He  was  highly  esteemed  by  his 
Brethren.  He  Died  in  May,  1718,  aged  04.  There  is  a  Memorial  Brass  to 
him  in  the  Burying-Ground  at  Kinross. 

WILLIAM  IRVINE,     A.D.  1718-80. 

Was  the  sou  of  Alexander  Irvine  of  Fortrie,  in  the  Parish  of  Ellon. 
He  Avas  Tutor  to  the  sous  of  Sir  James  Foullis  of  Collington,  a  Lord  of 
Session.  After  that  he  became  Minister  of  Kirkmichael,  in  Ayrshire.  He 
attended  the  Earl  of  Dimfermline  into  France  in  1G90.  He  Preached  before 
the  Battle  of  Killiccraukie  in  presence  of  Dundee's  Army  ;  and  again  he 
Preached  the  same  Sermon  in  the  Church  of  Kelso,  in  October,  1715,  to  the 
Jacobite  Army  commanded  by  Lord  Keumure  and  General  Foster.  For  the 
former  avowal  of  his  principles  he  was  imprisoned  at  Dundee,  but  escaped 
thence  to  St.  Gcrmains  ;  for  the  latter  he  was  taken  at  Preston  in  1715,  and 
carried  to  the  Fleet  Prison,  London,  where  he  was  incarcerated.  After 
wards  he  lived  commonly  at  Linlithgow.  He  Died  at  Edinburgh  the  9th 
December  [November],  1725,  and  was  Buried  beside  Bishop  Rose  at  Restal- 
rig.  He  was  of  a  forward  and  fiery  temper,  rough  and  blustering.  [Account 
of  Scnttixlt  7>/.s-/u>;w — Jl/.S'.  in  the  LUiranj  at  Slain*,  1730  ;  Collections  for  a 
History  of  the  Shires  of  Aberdeen  and  PmnjJ',  vol.  i.,  p.  300.] 

Bishop  Irvine  was  the  Royal  Exile's  most  devoted  adherent,  and  the 
very  tool  and  creature  of  Lockhart,  Laird  of  Carnwath.  An  attested  Copy 
of  his  Deed  of  Consecration,  which  took  place  at  Edinburgh,  23d  October, 
1718,  is  in  the  Episcopal  Cabinet  at  Glenalmond.  Mr.  Thomas  Stephen, 
in  his  "  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,"  vol.  iv.,  p.  183,  gives  an  Address 
which  Irvine  prepared  for  a  Meeting  of  the  College  of  Bishops  at  Edinburgh, 
2nd  February,  1723  ;  at  which,  however,  neither  Bishops  Falconar  nor 
Gadderar  were  present.  This  Ilemoxttrance  aud  Injunction  was  addressed 
"To  the  Episcopal  Church  of  Scotland,  as  well  Clergy  as  Laity,  exhorting 
and  obtesting  them  all  to  shun  those  fatal  rocks  whereon  others  have  been 
shipwrecked  before  ;  aud  requiring  the  Clergy  in  particular  to  forbear  the 
MIXTURE,  and  other  obsolete  USAGES,  aud  to  avoid  being  accessory  to  the 
breaking  the  Peace  of  the  Church,  aud  the  incurring  our  just  and  necessary 
censure?"  This  Document  was  Signed  and  agreed  to  by  "  John,  Bishop  of 
Edinburgh  ;  Arthur  Millar,  Bishop  ;  William  Irvine,  Bishop ;  Andrew  Cant, 
Bishop  ;  David  Freebairn,  Bishop." 


488  COLLEGE  BISHOPS. 

ANDREW  CANT,     A.D.  1722-80, 

Was  the  son  of  the  Principal  of  Edinburgh  University,  and  grandson  of 
the  stern  Covenanter  of  tlntt  ilk.  He  was  one  of  the  Ministers  of  Edinburgh, 
but  was  Deprived  in  1(388.  The  Mandate  by  King  James  for  the  Consecra 
tion  of  Andrew  Cant,  given  at  Rome,  2 2 ml  February,  1721,  is  in  the 
Episcopal  Cabinet,  Glcnalmond,  F.  0.  He  was  Consecrated  at  Edinburgh, 
17th  October,  1722. 

Lockhart,  in  his  "Papers,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  334,  gives  this  Bishop  rather  a 
good  character,  although  this  tends  to  show  what  despicable  truckling  the 
whole  of  these  College  Bishops  gave  to  Sovereigns  or  "  pretended"  Sovereigns. 
He  says — "The  factious  Bishops  [in  contradistinction  to  the  "College 
Bishops"]  .  .  .  did  not  think  themselves  bound  to  ask  after  the  King's 
approbation.  The  independence  of  the  Church  was  now  in  all  their  mouths  ; 
and,  indeed,  they  shewed  no  regard  for  any  powers,  Civil  or  Ecclesiastic, 

but  in  so  far  as  they  were  on  their  side  of  the  question So 

offended  were  the  Managers  of  the  most  considerable  Meeting  House  in 
Edinburgh,  that  they  dismissed  Bishop  Cant  and  Mr.  Middleton  from  being 
Pastors  thereof.  The  first  deserved  some  pity,  in  regard  he  was  a  person 
highly  valuable  on  account  of  his  integrity,  learning,  and  zeal,  and  that  the 
part  he  acted  was  only  to  be  ascribed  to  the  decay  of  his  judgment,  and 
being  easily  imposed  upon  in  his  advanced  age  ;  but  as  the  other  was  a 
factious,  arrogant  creature,  and  guilty  of  many  indecent,  irregular  actions, 
he  richly  merited  the  disgrace  he  met  with." 

He  Died  in  Edinburgh,  A.D.  1730.  in  the  Olst  year  of  his  age  and  64th 
of  his  Ministry. 

DAVID  RANKING,     A.D.  1727-28, 

Formerly  Minister  of  Bennathie,  was  Consecrated  at  Edinburgh,  some 
say  on  the  Festival  of  S.  Barnabas,  the  llth  June  ;  but  the  Author  of  the 
MS.  Memoirs  says  the  22nd  June,  1727.  Lockhart  [Papers,  vol.  ii.,  p.  355] 
observes — "For  by  this  time  they  [the  College  Bishops]  were  sensible  of  the 
wrong  step  they  had  taken  in  advancing  Ranken."  He  had  been  long 
afflicted  with  gravel,  which,  with  old  age,  caused  his  death  in  November, 
1728.  Thomas  Stephen  says — "  He  was  a  good,  well-meaning  man,  but 
tainted  with  that  opinion  that  the  Bishops  could  only  be  appointed  to 
Dioceses  by  the  Crown,  which  induced  him  to  unite  with  the  College  Party, 
under  the  most  absurd  and  useless  designation  of  Bishops  at  hirfje." 

Not  a  scrap  of  writing  remains  of  this  Bishop,  as  well  as  of  several  of 
the  others  ;  consequently  I  have  nothing  to  verify  or  gainsay  the  former 
portion  of  Mr.  Stephen's  Testimonial. 


THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW.  439 


THE   SEE   OF   GLASGOW. 

THE    CATHEDRAL. 

ANCIENT  Story  associates  the  Site  of  Glasgow  Cathedral  with  the  first 
Preaching  of  the  Faith  iu  Scotland.  Here  the  Cross  was  planted,  and  here 
was  Ground  Blessed  for  Christian  Burial  by  a  Christian  Bishop,  while  lona 
was  yet  an  unknown  Island  among  the  Western  Waves,  while  the  Promon 
tory  of  St.  Andrews  was  the  haunt  of  the  wild  Boar  and  the  Sea-mew,  and 
only  the  smoke  of  a  few  Heathen  Wigwams  ascended  from  the  Rock  of 
Edinburgh.  The  Ground  which  S.  Xinian  Hallowed,  and  S.  Kentigern 
chose  for  the  Seat  of  his  Religion,  was  honoured  also  by  the  footsteps  of  S. 
Columba,  who  came  hither  in  Pilgrimage  from  his  Island  Monastery, 
singing  Hymns  in  honour  of  the  Apostle  of  Strathclyde.  With  these 
vestiges  of  the  Holy  Men  of  old,  we  may  mingle  the  associations  of  ancient 
Romance  which  attach  to  the  Spiritual  Capital  and  Royal  Tombs  of  the 
Kingdom  of  Arthur  and  Merlin,  of  Aneurin  and  Taliesin. 

The  Edifice  which  we  now  behold  has  seen  the  English  Edwaid 
prostrate  before  its  High  Altar,  and  heard  his  Vows  at  the  gloomy  Shrine  of 
S.  Kentigern.  It  witnessed  the  Absolution  of  Bruce,  while  the  Red  Cumyn's 
blood  was  scarce  yet  dry  upon  his  dagger.  Its  Walls  rang  with  Exhorta 
tions  that  it  was  better  in  the  Eye  of  Heaven  to  fight  for  that  outlawed 
Homicide,  than  to  do  battle  for  the  Cross  in  the  Holy  Land.  In  its  Vestry 
were  the  Bruce's  Coronation  Robes  made -ready  in  haste  ;  from  its  Treasury 
was  "the  Banner  of  Scotland"  taken,  Avhich  waved  above  the  ruined 
"Kaiser  stuhl"  at  Scone,  when,  with  maimed  Rites  and  a  scanty  Train, 
Heralds  proclaimed  him  "Robert,  King  of  the  Scots."  In  a  more  peaceful 
Age,  its  Chapter  House  and  Crypt  sheltered  the  infant  Convocations  of  the 
University,  in  which  Smith  was  to  teach  Doctrines  that  have  changed  the 
Policy  of  Nations,  and  Watt  was  to  perfect  Discoveries  that  have  subdued 
the  Elements  to  be  the  ministers  of  mankind.  It  has  seen  a  King  serving 
at  its  Altars  ;  for,  as  the  Emperor  was  a  Canon  of  Cologne,  and  the  French 
Monarch  a  Prebendary  of  Tours,  so  a  Scottish  Sovereign  (the  devout  and 
chivalrous  King  James  of  Flodden)  had  a  Stall  in  the  Choir  and  a  Seat  in 
the  Chapter  of  Glasgow.  Beneath  the  shadow  of  its  Rood-loft,  unrestrained 


440  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

by  the  presence  of  the  Patriarch  of  Venice,  the  Primates  of  Scotland — 
following  the  example  of  Canterbury  and  York  in  an  earlier  Age — have 
brawled  and  struggled  for  Precedency,  amid  the  cries  of  their  Attendants, 
the  rending  of  Cope  and  Surplice,  and  the  crash  of  shivered  Croziers.  John 
Kuox  described,  and  may  have  witnessed  the  Tumult ;  but  his  triumph 
would  have  been  checked  could  he  have  foreseen  that,  before  his  own 
Discipline  was  20  years  old,  the  same  Walls  were  to  witness  a  Piiot  not  less 
unseemly  among  his  own  Followers  ;  were  to  hear  the  clash  of  steel,  to  see 
the  "Moderator  of  the  Presbytery"  plucked  by  the  beard  from  his  Seat  of 
Office;  the  Preacher  pulled  by  the  sleeve  in  the  Pulpit,  with  a  "Come 
down,  sirrah!''  while  without,  Bells  were  rung,  Drums  beat,  and  blood 
flowed  in  the  streets.  Buchanan — so  long  Scotland's  greatest  name  in 
Letters — trod  the  Aisles  of  Glasgow  in  his  youth,  and  sat  a  delighted  guest 
at  the  Classic  table  of  its  Archbishop.  That  Castle  Hall  was  forsaken,  the 
desolate  Cathedral  was  hastening  to  decay,  when  Buchanan's  Pupil,  Andrew 
Melville,  is  said  to  have  clamoured  for  the  instant  Destruction  of  the  Pile  as 
"a  Monument  of  Idolatry,"  whither  superstitious  people  "  resorted  to  do 
their  Devotion,"  and  Avliich,  by  reason  of  its  "huge  vastncss,"  was  all 
unsuited  for  the  stern  simplicity  of  "  Orthodox  Putcs."  But  the  time  of  the 
old  Minster  was  not  yet  come  :  the  Edifice  which  Melville  wished  to  destroy 
was  reserved  to  be  the  Theatre  of  the  proudest  triumph  which  Melville's 
Disciples  ever  achieved.  Large  as  are  the  dimensions  of  the  High  Church 
of  Strathclyde,  they  were  much  too  narrow  for  the  eager  Multitudes  who 
swarmed  round  its  Gates  in  December,  1G38;  while  Avithin,  Covenanted 
Ministers,  and  Nobles,  gorged  with  Church  Spoil,  were  defying  their  King 
and  Excommunicating  their  Bishops.  It  was,  perhaps,  the  greatest  con 
fluence  of  people,  says  Burnct,  "  that  ever  met  in  these  parts  of  Europe;  yet 
a  sad  sight  to  see,  for  not  a  Gown  was  among  them  all,  but  many  had 
Swords  and  Daggers."  Baillie,  the  Covenanting  Principal  of  the  neigh 
bouring  College,  gives  even  a  fiercer  picture  of  this  memorable  Council. 
"We  might  learn  modesty  and  manners  from  the  Turks  or  Pagans,"  he 
breaks  out ;  "  our  Rascals,  without  shame,  in  great  numbers,  make  such  din 
and  clamour  in  the  House  of  the  true  God,  that  if  they  used  the  like 
behaviour  in  my  Chamber,  I  would  not  be  content  till  they  were  thrust 
down  stairs."  Such  was  the  characteristic  disorder  amid  which  the 
"  Jericho  of  Prelacy"  was  cast  down,  and  "  the  Curse  of  Hiel  the  Bethelite" 
thundered  against  all  who  should  attempt  its  rebuilding.  But  the  exultation 
of  that  day  was  not  to  prove  lasting.  A  brief  course  of  15  years  saw  the 
Assembly  of  the  Covenanted  Kirk  invaded  by  Theocratic  Enthusiasts  yet 


THE  CATHEDRAL. 


441 


wilder  than  themselves — saw  the  Members  marched  iu  silence  to  the  foot  of 
the  Gallows-tree,  and  there  dismissed  with  an  ominous  warning  of  the 
destiny  which  awaited  them  should  they  seek  to  meet  again.  Before  that 
Scene  was  acted  on  the  Burgh  Moor  of  Edinburgh,  Cromwell  had  sat  in  the 
High  Church  of  Glasgow  listening  for  three  hours  to  the  impotent  railing  of 
Mr.  Zachary  Boyd,  smiling  at  the  impatient  rage  of  his  Captains,  who  spoke 
of  Pistolling  the  Preacher,  and  taking  a  more  ingenious  revenge,  by 
subjecting  Mr.  Zachary  to  a  private  Homily,  longer  and  drearier  than  his 


THE    ARCHI-EPISCOPAL  PALACE   AND   CATHEDRAL,    ABOUT   A.D.    1050. 

own.  Glasgow  echoed  the  universal  delight  which  hailed  the  Restoration ; 
yet,  amid  that  joyous  Tumult,  a  voice  was  heard  from  the  depths  of  her 
Cathedral  Crypt  prophesying  woe  and  lamentations — Cargill,  the  rugged 
Confessor  of  a  relentless  Covenant,  sparing  not  to  denounce  the  faithless 
King  even  on  the  first  "oak-apple  day"  of  his  Reign.  A  few  years  pass, 
and,  in  the  Choir  above,  the  low  sweet  voice  of  Leighton  is  heard  in  those 
angelic  strains  of  eloquence  and  devotion  which  haunted  the  memory  of  his 
hearers  to  their  dying  day.  A  few  years  more  and  the  Cathedral  is  beset  by 


VOL.  II. 


442  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

a  surging  crowd  of  Cameronians — Fanatic  Wanderers  from  the  Hills,  whoso 
wrath  will  not  tarry  for  the  slow  retribution  of  the  Law,  but  who  are  there, 
at  their  own  hand,  to  purge  the  Temple  of  God  of  "  the  Prelatical 
Intruders,"  as  "Dumb  Dogs,"  "Erastians,"  "Schismatics,"  "Covenant- 
Breakers,"  and  "Soul-Murderers."  And  now,  "last  Scene  of  all,"  after 
Centuries  of  neglect,  the  breaches  of  S.  Keutigern's  venerable  High  Church 
have  been  repaired,  and  its  decayed  places  raised  up ;  it  is  swept  and 
garnished ;  those  Western  Portals  so  long  closed  are  thrown  open.  Who, 
in  these  days  of  sudden  and  marvellous  mutation,  shall  say  for  what  or  for 
whom  they  wait '?  [tjunrtci-h/  7iVnY/r,  ml.  8i,  p.  134.] 

Glasgow  High  Church  or  Cathedral  is  situated  on  nearly  the  highest 
ground  within  the  Municipality,  and  in  early  times  its  position  must  have 
been  singularly  commanding  and  beautiful — closely  laved  on  the  Eastern 
side  by  the  then  (not  certainly  nuic]  pellucid  Waters  of  the  Molendiuar ; 
the  Clyde  singing  on  its  way  to  the  Sea,  in  the  Valley  below;  and 
lengthening  Woods  and  verdant  Slopes  all  around.  Even  at  the  present 
day,  surrounded  as  it  is  by  the  miles  of  massive  Masonry  of  a  City  with 
500,000  inhabitants,  the  Cathedral  retains  its  early  prominence  and  dis- 
tinctiveness.  It  has  not  been  shut  into  a  corner,  nor  has  its  beauty  been 
marred  by  the  immediate  proximity  of  mean  Buildings,  as  is  the  case  with 
many  other  Cathedrals.  On  a  clear  Sunday  morning  the  view  from  the  top 
is  superb.  Eastward,  the  eye  ranges  over  the  upper  Yale  of  Clyde,  with  its 
Haughs  and  Woods,  Bothwell,  and  the  princely  Domains  of  Hamilton,  till 
the  view  is  bounded  by  the  lofty  Tinto.  Westward,  the  spectator  has  before 
him  the  course  of  the  Clyde  to  the  Ocean,  the  Renfrewshire  Hills,  the  Town 
of  Paisley,  the  Ruins  of  Cruickston,  Dumbarton  with  its  Rock  and  Fortress, 
and  the  serrated  Peaks  of  the  Argyleshire  Mountains.  North  are  the 
picturesque  Hills  of  Campsie,  and  Southward  the  cultivated  Braes  of  Cath- 
kiu  and  Castlemilk ;  while  the  wide  expanse  of  the  City  is  spread  at  the 
gazer's  feet,  with  all  its  evidences  of  activity,  enterprise,  and  successful  and 
unceasing  industry. 

The  Cathedral  of  S.  Mungo,  or  Kentigern,  is  composed  of  a  Nave  of 
eight  Bays,  North- West  Tower,  a  short  Transept,  a  central  Tower  and  Spire, 
a  Choir  of  five  Bays,  Lady  Chapel  of  two  Bays,  and  Chapter-House  at  the 
North-East  cud.  The  Choir,  Lady  Chapel,  and  Crypt  are  Late  Early  Eng 
lish  ;  the  Nave  is  Decorated,  as  are  the  Cbapter-House  and  Lateral  Crypts. 
The  Choir  Floor  is  140  feet  above  the  Stream. 

This  stupendous  and  magnificent  Building  was  erected  in  the  great  age 
of  Ecclesiastical  Architecture,  and  completed  in  the  Noontide  of  its  glory 


THE  CATHEDEAL.  443 

and  grandeur.  For  the  most  part  it  was  built  during  the  Lancet  Period. 
Its  Crypt  is  Early  English;  the  Spire,  Nave,  Chapter-House,  and  Transept- 
Crypt  being  cither  Late  Decorated  or  Flamboyant.  It  is  an  imposing  dusky 
Fabric,  stately,  solemn,  solid,  and  venerable,  elevated  on  the  brink  of  a 
Eavine,  through  which  flows  the  Eivtilet  Molendiuar.  The  Precinct  is  in 
the  North-East  quarter  of  the  City,  in  the  Townhead,  and  at  the  upper  end 
of  the  High  Street,  from  which  an  open  space  of  Cemetery,  surrounded  by 
Walls,  wholly  sequesters  it. 

The  Glasgow  folks  compared  the  Building  to  Penelope's  web,  saying 
that,  like  S.  Mungo's  Work,  it  would  never  be  finished.  The  Church  was 
erected  on  the  Site  of  a  wooden  Structure  which  had  been  burned  down  by 
Bishop  Achaius  in  1130;  but  the  new  Fabric  having  been  again  destroyed 
by  fire,  the  Foundation  of  another  Church  was  laid  in  1181  by  Bishop 
Jocelyn,  and  the  Crypt  dedicated  July  6,  1197.  The  Spire  was  in  progress 
in  1277.  In  1258  Bishop  William  do  Boudington  saw  the  Choir  completed. 
In  1291  Edward  I.  gave  certain  Oaks  to  Bishop  Wishart  to  complete  the 
Steeple,  but  the  Bishop  converted  them  into  Catapults  for  the  Siege  of 
Kirkintilloch  Castle.  Bishop  W.  Lander,  1408-25,  commenced,  and  Bishop 
John  Cameron,  1425-47,  completed,  the  present  Spire,  the  Chapter-House, 
and  Crypt  beneath  it.  The  North  Aisle  was  roofed  by  Bishop  Muirhead, 
1455-73.  Before  1480  the  Nave,  begun  in  the  Fourteenth  Century,  and  the 
North-West  Tower,  were  completed.  Archbishop  Blackadder,  1484-1508, 
built  the  Eood-Loft,  and  the  Stairs  of  the  Great  Crypt. 

The  Crypt  under  the  South  Transept  is  said  to  have  been  also  Built  by 
him;  hence  the  name  " Blackadder's  Aisle."  In  "  Macgeorge's  Armorial 
Insignia  of  Glasgow,"  p.  33,  we  learn  that  it  had  another  name  when  it  was 
Built,  which  is  Inscribed  in  plain  Saxon  Letters  over  the  Entrance  to  it : — 

tf)i#  i#  tlje  ile  of  car,  fergu& 

In  the  Life  of  S.  Kentigern,  we  read  that  there  was  a  holy  man,  named 
Fergus,  dwelling  in  a  place  called  Keruach,  to  whom  it  was  revealed  that  he 
should  not  die  till  he  had  seen  S.  Kentigern.  He  Died  immediately  after 
the  Saint  entered  his  house ;  and  Kentigern  having  placed  his  body  in  a 
Car,  yoked  to  it  two  wild  Bulls,  commanding  them  to  carry  it  to  the  place 
ordained  of  the  Lord.  This  they  did  meekly,  and,  followed  by  the  Saint 
and  a  great  Multitude,  they  carried  it  to  Glasgow — then,  as  the  Legend 
says,  called  Catlmrcs — where  they  rested  beneath  certain  ancient  Trees  near 
a  forsaken  Cemetery,  which  had  been  hallowed  by  S.  Ninian  of  Galloway. 
Here  the  Eernains  of  the  good  Fergus  were  committed  to  the  earth,  and  this 


iil  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

was  the  first  Burial  made  in  that  place.  Over  what  was  supposed  to  be  the 
very  spot  was  the  South  Transept  of  the  Cathedral  Founded,  and  its  Crypt 
Dedicated  to  this  Fenju*.  Within  the  Circle  of  the  Stone  containing  the 
above-noticed  Inscription,  is  a  rude  Representation  of  the  Car,  with  the 
Body  of  Fergus  extended  thereupon.  This  incident  is  also  alluded  to  in  the 
following  Lines  of  the  Eucharistic  Hymn  for  the  Festival  of  S.  Kentigern:  — 

"  Snevi  bovcs  subjugati, 
Plaustra  portent  ponclera." 

This  Crypt  was  long  used  as  the  Burying  Place  for  the  "  City  Ministers," 
and  some  few  privileged  Families.  The  remainder  of  the  Building  was 
completed  by  Cardinal  Beaton. 

The  late  Western  Tower  and  Consistory  House  were  built  closely 
against  the  Western  end  of  the  Cathedral,  and  formed  the  most  prominent 
object  of  the  view  in  approaching  the  Church  from  the  City,  and  have  been 
removed  within  the  last  20  years.  They  were  very  generally  set  down,  by 
men  of  taste  and  Architectural  knowledge,  as  abortive  afterthoughts  or 
excrescences,  which  had  no  connexion  with  the  pristine  designs  of  the 
Cathedral ;  but  a  curious  Controversy  was  carried  on  for  some  time  with  the 
view  of  proving  that  this  old  Tower  claimed  honours  of  antiquity  even 
superior  to  those  of  Bishop  Joceline's  Crypt  itself.  In  the  progress  of 
removal,  evidence  was  obtained  which  showed  that  this  latter  supposition 
was  entirely  groundless.  Li  matter  of  fact,  the  Tower  was  a  squat,  dumpy 
erection,  rising  to  a  height  of  about  120  feet ;  and,  from  a  Legacy  in  the 
Will  of  Archbishop  Duubar,  for  the  erection  of  a  "  Campanile,"  it  is  believed 
to  have  been  built  only  a  few  years  before  the  advent  of  the  "  Reformation" 
put  a  stop  to  all  further  extensions  of  the  Cathedral.  A  Clock  and  Bell 
were  placed  here.  The  latter  is  now  in  the  main  Tower,  originally  given  by 
Marcus  Knox,  Merchant,  in  1594,  and  re-cast  in  London,  1790. 

The  Consistory  House  was  a  large,  high-gabled  Tenement,  supported 
by  Buttresses,  and  lighted  on  the  South  side  by  a  variety  of  plain  square- 
headed  and  pointed  Windows.  The  Consistory  and  Commissary  Courts 
were  held  here ;  and  here  also  were  kept  the  Records  of  the  Court,  and  an 
immense  mass  of  Documents,  amounting  to  many  waggon-loads,  connected 
with  Pleas  and  Processes  before  the  Courts,  extending  over  a  period  of  two 
or  three  Centuries.  When  the  Commissary  Court  was  abolished,  about  50 
years  ago,  the  Records  were  sent  into  Edinburgh ;  but  an  immense  quantity 
of  curious  Papers  remained,  not  properly  belonging  to  this  Court,  and  as  no 
one  seemed  to  care  for  them,  they  were  allowed  to  disappear,  having  either 


THE  CATHEDEAL.  445 

been  burned,  or  carried  away  by  any  one  who  took  a  fancy  to  what  seemed 
a  litter  of  Manuscripts.  Some  of  these  Documents,  which  have  been 
preserved,  are  exceedingly  interesting,  and  throw  curious  light  on  the 
manners  of  a  bygone  Age.  It  is  most  humiliating  to  admit  that  this  work 
of  spoliation  and  destruction  has  taken  place  so  recently. 

The  West  Door,  17  feet  by  11,  is  of  great  richness  and  beauty,  and 
by  half  a  Century  earlier  than  the  Nave.     It  is  a  double  Portal   of   six 
quasi-shafted  Orders  with  21  feet  span,  with  a  square  head  to  each  Entrance, 
and  the  space  above  is  filled  with  Niches.     It  is  divided  by  a  single  Pillar, 
and   wears   a  Continental  aspect.     In  the  Clerestory  of  the  Nave  (Early 
Decorated,  of  the  Fourteenth  Century),  Couplets  of  two-light  Windows,  with 
a  Lozenge  in  the  head,  fills  each  Bay.     In  the  Aisles  in  each  Bay  is  a  single 
three-light  Window,  each  composed  of  three  Lancets,  with  a  Trefoiled  Circle 
for  Tracery,  and  divided  by  Chamfered  Buttresses.    Above  the  Corbel  Table 
in  either  Storey  are  grotesque  Gurgoyles.    What  mystical  meanings  attach  to 
the  double  Figures  in  which  the  Corbels  of  the  Tabernacled  and  Buttressed 
Pillars  of  the  Parapet  terminate,  cannot  now  be  explained.    The  old  woman 
coaxingly  pulling  or  pinching  the  ear  of  the  shy  and  modest  looking  youth ; 
and  the  young  wenches  chucking  the  chin,  and  making  equivocal  advances 
to  the  old  men  with  whom  they  are  associated,  as  well  as  the  indications 
from  some  other  mutilated  Figures,  which  we  do  not  choose  to  particularize, 
are  certainly  provocative  of  anything  but  modest  associations,  according  to 
our  modern  ideas.     And  yet  the  peculiarly  strict  and  rigid  manner  in  which 
anything  sensual  or  obscene  was  prohibited  in  the  language  and  conduct  of 
the  Artists  and  Operatives  by  whom  the  Sacred  Edifices  were  constructed, 
forbids  the  supposition  that  anything  of  the  kind  was  intended.     We  are 
shut  up,  indeed,  to  the  more  charitable  conclusion,  that  they  are  Illustra 
tions  of  Scripture  Story  or  Allegory— monitions  of  the  wiles  and  enticements 
Of  Vice— executed  in  that  Doric  simplicity  and  matter-of-fact   plainness, 
characteristic  of  the  practices  of  the  olden  times,  both  in  language  and 
representation.     The  Figures  on  the  Front  represent  Eleven  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles— Judas,  with  artistic  justice,  being  of  course  excluded. 

In  the  Interior,  the  Arches  of  the  Nave  are  Pointed  with  deep  Mould 
ings.  It  is  63  feet  broad,  and  85  feet  high.  The  Vaulting  Shafts  rest  upon 
Corbels.  The  Triforium  in  each  Bay  is  divided  by  clustered  Shafts,  and 
consists  of  two  Trefoiled  Lights,  with  a  Trefoil  in  the  head.  The  Clerestory 
has  a  broad  Wall  Passage,  and  a  Gallery  with  two  noble  Pointed  Arches  in 
each  Bay.  The  Wood  Roof  is  ribbed.  The  Aisles  retain  their  Stone 
Quadripartite  Groining.  The  South-Easternmost  Windows  of  the  Triforium 


446  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

are  of  three  lights,  but  have  a  curiously  complicated  pattern.  The  Transept 
is  73  feet  long.  The  Choir  Screen  is  most  elaborate  ;  on  either  side  of  a 
Door,  with  a  low,  depressed  Arch,  arc  five  Panels,  and  above  is  an  open, 
quatrefoiled,  ilamboyant  Parapet,  with  seven  pairs  of  Figures  serving  as 
Corbels  to  support  the  Canopied  Buttresses.  Five  Stairs  lead  up  to  the 
Pace,  the  sides  of  which  have  Figures  bearing  Legends  under  Canopies. 

The  East  end  of  the  Choir,  which  has  five  Bays,  is  composed  of  two 
Pointed  Arches,  under  an  engaged  group  of  four  tall  Lancets;  the  two 
innermost  being  the  loftiest,  and  filling  the  space  which  ordinarily  would 
have  been  divided  between  the  Clerestory  and  Triforium.  On  the  Vaulting 
are  seen  Emblematic  Devices  and  numerous  Coats  of  Arms  of  different 
Bishops  and  Prebends  ;  amongst  these,  on  the  left  of  the  High  Altar,  are  the 
Royal  Arms  of  Scotland,  placed  there  in  the  time  of  James  IV.,  who  was  a 
Canon  and  Member  of  the  Chapter.  The  Clerestory,  of  the  latter  part  of 
the  Thirteenth  Century,  is  formed  of  Triplets  of  equal  lights,  in  front  of 
them ;  on  the  Interior  is  a  Screen  to  the  "Wall  Passage  of  similar  design. 
The  Triforium  consists  of  double  Windows  of  two  trefoiled  lights,  with  a 
quatrefoil  in  the  head  in  each  Bay.  The  Roof,  of  wood,  90  feet  high,  is 
ribbed,  and  enriched  with  carved  Bosses.  The  Capitals  under  the  great 
Arches  of  the  Tower  present  the  earliest  instance  of  Foliation  in  North 
Britain. 

The  Lady  Chapel,  a  double  cross  Aisle,  is  approached  from  either  of 
the  Aisles  of  the  Choir.  It  extends  in  breadth  28  feet  East  from  the  Choir, 
and  is  in  length  equal  with  the  width  of  the  Choir  and  its  Aisles.  The 
groined  Roof  is  supported  by  three  elegant  clustered  Columns,  and  rises  to 
a  height  of  about  25  feet ;  the  small  Columns  of  the  Lanceted  Windows, 
and  the  Clustered  Pilasters,  from  which  spring  the  Ribs  that  support  the 
Vaultings,  arc  crowned  with  Capitals  of  the  greatest  intricacy  and  beauty. 
The  Carving  here  is  still  more  delicate  and  elaborate  than  in  the  Choir,  and 
the  Foliage  is  so  deeply  undercut,  that  human  figures,  birds,  and  animals, 
are  seen  nestled  among  its  branches ;  the  Bosses  of  the  Roof  are  not  less 
elaborately  finished.  It  is  only  on  two  of  the  Windows  on  the  East  end  of 
this  Chapel,  and  upon  the  Arches  at  the  Western  end  of  the  Aisles  of  the 
Choir,  that  the  Flowered  or  Toothed  Ornament  is  to  be  seen.  The  Lady 
Chapel  was  long  allowed  to  remain  in  a  pitiable  state  of  neglect,  and  its 
exquisite  Carvings  were  choked  up  by  the  rubbish,  dust,  and  mildew,  of  two 
Centuries ;  but  the  recent  renovations  have  brought  them  out  in  their 
pristine  beauty.  This  Chapel  contains  a  solitary  Monument  to  the  memory 
of  Archbishop  Law. 


THE  CATHEDRAL. 


447 


The  Chapter  House  was  Founded  by  Bishop  Lauder,  and  is  a  Cube, 
measuring  internally  28  feet,  supported  by  one  central  Column.  For  a 
lengthened  period  subsequent  to  the  "Reformation,"  the  Chapter  House 
was  the  place  of  meeting  of  the  Presbytery  of  Glasgow,  and  is  still 
used  as  the  Vestry  or  Session-House  of  the  "Inner  High  Church"  Con 
gregation. 

The  Crypt  was  built  by  Bishop  Joce- 
lyn  in  1181,  and  Consecrated  1197.  Its 
Architecture  is  matchless  Early  English, 
solid,  richly  and  intricately  vaulted  ;  the 
perspective  of  its  Aisles  is  varied  and 
enchanting.  It  has  41  Windows,  and  4.5 
Pillars. 

Roman  Catholic  Architects  were  not 
content  merely  to  found  a  Sub-stratum 
for  the  Choir  above.  They  expended  all 
the  resources  of  their  Art  in  adorning  the 
spot  which  was  to  receive  the  Remains  of 
the  Prelates  and  Benefactors  of  the  See  ; 
and,  after  the  lapse  of  seven  Centuries, 
it  stands  alone  in  its  dignity  and  beauty. 
The  Crypt  extends  in  length,  beneath  the 
Choir  and  Lady  Chapel,  125  feet,  by  02 
in  width ;  its  height,  beneath  the  Choir, 

is  about  15  feet ;  but  at  the  Lady  Chapel,   part  of  a  Chain  attached  to  it    Cir. 
where  the  soil  falls  rapidly  without,  the   A.L>.  11S0.     [.1fdroy 
level  of  the  Ceiling  is  maintained,  whilst 
the  Floor  descends  about  4  feet,  making, 
the  height  of  this  portion  about  20  feet. 
The  principal  Piers  are  found  here,  as  a 
matter  of  course,  beneath  those  of  the 
Superstructure  ;  but,  in  addition  to  these, 
two  Rows  of  Columns  support  the  Pave 
ment  of  the  centre  Area  of  the   Choir, 
whilst    an   additional   Pillar   of  smaller       Chapter  Seal,  with  figure  of  S.  Ken- 
dimensions   is   placed    between   each   of  tigeru,  his  right  hand  raised,  his  left 

-,  TV  m     TV         holding  the  Croxier.      At  the  dexter 

those  carrying  its  mam  Piers.    The  Piers     .      .  ° .     „ 

side  is  the  r  isli  and  lung,  at  the  smi- 
assume  every  possible  form  of  triangular,  stcr  a  Bird  perciied  on  the  top  of  a 

round,   and   multangular,    and   are   em-  Bell.    A.D.  l^l.    [Mdros  Charters.'] 


Chapter  Seal,  bearing  the  device  of 
the  Paschal  Lamb,  its  left  foot  rest 
ing  on  what  seems  to  be  a  Ring  with 


448  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

braced  by  attached  Columns,  having  Capitals  of  all  possible  varieties,  from 
the  simple  Norman  to  the  most  intricate  Foliage.  The  Groiuings  spring 
ing  from  the  Columns  are  very  numerous,  particularly  beneath  the  Chancel, 
where  they  exhibit  an  astonishing  combination  of  interesting  Tracery,  and 
richly  Carved  Losses,  the  splendour  of  which  has  attracted  the  admiration 
of  the  ablest  Judges. 

It  was  long  used  as  the  Barony  Kirk  ;  in.  it  Eob  Roy  appointed  a 
meeting  with  Frank  Osbaldistone.  This  Crypt  was  cleared  and  opened  out 
by  Mr.  Xixon  in  1835. 

In  the  South  Aisle  of  the  Nave  is  the  only  Bras*  extant  in  Scotland, 
an  Oblong,  3  feet  2  inches  by  G  feet,  to  the  memory  of  six  Knights  of  the 
House  of  Minto,  Dated  1008. 

The  Central  Tower  rises  30  feet  above  the  Eoof,  and  rests  on  four  mas 
sive  Pillars,  each  29  feet  in  circumference.  The  Octangular  Spire  is  of  good 
dimensions  and  outline,  with  fine  Spire  Lights  and  two  rich  Bands.  The 
Tower  has  four  Lancets  in  each,  the  two  outer  being  blank,  under  a  qua  tre 
foil  Parapet.  The  entire  Steeple  is  225  feet  high. 

The  East  end  of  the  Choir  consists  of  four  Lancets,  the  two  innermost 
being  longer,  set  between  two  plain  Pilaster  Buttresses,  with  a  square 
Window  under  a  round  Arch  in  the  Gable.  Couplets  light  the  four  Bays  of 
the  Lady  Chapel  above  and  the  Crypt  beneath.  The  projection  of  the 
Chapel  will  remind  the  visitor  of  the  large  Eastern  Cross  of  Durham  and 
Fountains. 

The  total  length  of  the  Church  is  319  feet.  It  is  1090  feet  in  circum 
ference,  covers  an  area  of  20,400  feet,  and  contains  147  Pillars  and  157 
Windows. 

The  Cathedral  has  been  restored  by  Blore.  To  Sir  Andrew  Orr,  when 
Lord  Provost,  are  the  public  indebted  for  the  first  practical  steps  which  led 
to  the  noble  scheme  for  filling  the  Windows  with  Painted  Glass.  The 
Subjects  were  arranged  by  Charles  Heath  Wilson,  Architect. 

LIST    OF    ALTARS    IX    THE    CATHEDRAL. 

In  1459  the  Sacrist  had  special  charge  of  keeping  in  repair  the  Furni 
ture  and  Ornaments  of  only  the  High  Altar,  and  those  of  the  Holy  Cross, 
S.  Catharine,  S.  Martin,  and  S.  Mary  the  Virgin,  in  the  Lower  Church;  but 
there  were  numerous  Altars  in  the  Church,  most  of  which  had  permanent 
Endowments  for  Chaplains  or  for  the  maintenance  of  Lights.  Some  of  them 
follow : — 

1.  The  High  Altar  had  a  Chaplainry  endowed  by  William  the  Lion  with 
100.9  from  the  Revenues  of  the  Sheriffdom  of  Lanark.  On  the  2nd  August, 


LIST  OF  ALTAES.  449 

1301,  Edward  I.  offered  at  this  Altar  an  Oblation  of  Seven  Shillings.  He 
repeated  his  Offering  next  day,  and  offered  also  Seven  Shillings  on  that  day, 
and  on  the  3rd  September,  at  the  Shrine  of  S.  Kentigern. 

2.  S.  Kentigern's  Altar  near  his  Tornb  in  the  lower  Church,  received  in 
1400  an  annual  Rent  to  maintain  the  Lights  before  it,  and  in  1507  Arch 
bishop  Robert  founded  a  Chaplainry  at  it,  which  he  endowed  with  part  of 
the  Rents  of  Craigrossy.     Before  the  year  1233,  William  Cumyn,  Earl  of 
Buchan,  gave  a  Stone  of  Wax  yearly  for  the  Lights  at  a  Mass  to  be  said 
daily  at  the  Altar  of  the  Tomb  of  S.  Keiitigern.     In  1475  James  III.  con 
firmed  an  ancient  Grant  of  three  Stones  of  Wax  from  the  Lordship  of  Both- 
well,  half  of  which  he  directed  to  be  used  for  the  Lights  above  the  Tomb  of 
S.  Keiitigern.     The  "  Tumba  Saiicti  Kentigerni"  was  endowed  also  with 
certain  Roods  of  Land  on  the  confines  of  the  City. 

3.  Another  Altar  to  S.  Keiitigern  was  founded  on  the  South  side  of  the 
Nave  of  the  Church,  by  Walter  Steward,  Knight,  and  endowed  for  a  Chap 
lain,  in  1500,  by  his  son,  Andrew,  Archdeacon  of  Galloway. 

4.  An  Altar  dedicated  to  the  Virgin  stood  in  the  Crypt,  or  lower  Church, 
and  another  at  the  entrance  of  the  Choir ;  besides  an  Image  of  "  S.  Mary  of 
Consolation,"  at  or  near  the  Altar  of  S.  John  the  Baptist,  in  the  Nave. 

Robert,  a  Burgess  of  Glasgow,  and  Elizabeth,  his  wife,  gave,  before 
1290,  a  Tenement  for  the  augmentation  of  the  Light  of  S.  Mary  the  Virgin's 
Altar  in  "  le  crudes,"  or  Crypt.  In  14GO,  an  annual  of  12</  was  given  from 
a  Tenement  "in  vico  fullonum,"  or  Walcargate  (now  the  Saltmarket),  by 
David  Hynde,  Burgess,  for  the  sustentatioii  of  the  Lights  of  S.  Mary  and  S. 
Keiitigern  in  the  Lower  Church.  In  1507,  Archbishop  Robert  founded 
three  perpetual  Chaplainries  from  the  Rents  of  the  Lands  of  Craigrossy,  one 
of  which  was  for  the  Service  of  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary  of  Consolation. 
He  also  gave  one  Merit  annually  for  the  reparation  of  the  Ornaments  of  the 
Altar  of  S.  Mary  of  Pity,  at  the  South  Entrance  of  the  Choir,  at  which  he 
had  before  founded  a  perpetual  Chaplainry. 

5.  S.  Servaii's  Altar  was  rebuilt  in  1446  by  David  de  Cadyhow,  who  gave 
an  annual  of  £10  to  the  Vicars  of  the  Choir  and  their  Successors,  for  the 
Celebration  of  a  daily  Mass  there. 

G.  S.  Mauchan's,  or  S.  Machan's,  Altar  was  placed  on  the  North  side  of 
the  Nave,  at  the  third  Pillar  from  the  Rood  Loft  (ad  tertiam  columnam  a 
solio  crucifix!)  and  had  been  constructed  of  hewn  and  polished  Stone  (sectis 
et  politis  lapidibus)  by  Patrick  Leclie,  who,  in  1458,  endowed  it  for  a 
perpetual  Chaplain  with  Rents  from  Tenements  in  Glasgow,  and  gave  the 
Patronage  to  the  Community  and  Burgesses. 

7.  S.  John  the  Baptist,  S.  Blasius  the  Martyr,  and  S.  Cuthbert  the  Con 
fessor,  had  each  an  Altar  in  the  Nave  of  the  Church,  which  had  been 
founded  and  endowed  for  perpetual  Chaplains  before  1467,  by  the  Dean, 
Sub-Dean,  Treasurer,  and  others.  Their  Emoluments  arose  from  certain 
Lands,  Tenements,  and  Annual  Rents,  within  the  City  and  Territory  of 
Glasgow,  then  confirmed  by  Andrew  the  Bishop. 

In  1494,  Archibald  Quhitelaw,  Sub-Dean  of  Glasgow,  and  Archdeacon 
of  St.  Andrews,  founded  a  Chaplainry  at  the  Altar  of  S.  John  the  Baptist, 
from  several  Tenements,  Lands,  and  Rents,  lying  in  the  City. 

The  Altar  to  S.  John  the  Baptist  and  S.  Nicolas,  situated  in  the  South 
Aisle  of  the  Church,  at  the  first  Pillar  from  the  Rood  Loft,  was  endowed  for 
a  perpetual  Chaplain  in  1524,  with  Lands,  Tenements,  and  Annual  Rents, 
by  Roland  Blacadyr,  the  Sub-Dean. 
VOL.  n.  3  L 


450  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

8.  James  Douglas  of  Auchinchassil  founded  a  Cliaplainry  at  S.  Cuth- 
bert's  Altar,  on  the  South  side  of  the  Nave,  with  annual  Eents  from  Tene 
ments  in  the  Burghs  of  Glasgow  and  Linlithgow.      It  was  confirmed   by 
Bishop  Andrew  in  1472. 

9.  The  Altar  of  All  Saints  was  on  the  North  side  of  the  Nave,  at  the 
fifth  Pillar  from  the  Eood-Loft.     It  was  endowed  in  1495  for  support  of  a 
Chaplain  by  David  Cuniiighame,  Archdeacon  of  Argylc  and  Provost  of  the 
Collegiate  Church  of  Hamilton,  with  Tenements  in  the  Burgh  of  Dumbarton. 

10.  The  Aisle  (or  Chapel)  of  S.  Michael  the  Archangel  was  behind  the 
great  South  Door  of  the  Church  towards  the  West.     In  1478,  Gilbert  Eerik, 
Archdeacon  of  Glasgow,  founded  a  Cliaplainry  at  its  Altar  from  Tenements 
in  the  Burgh,  and  provided  that  on  S.  Michael's  Day  the  Chaplain,  after 
Divine  Service,  should  distribute,  in  presence  of  the  people,  "  among  30  poor 
and  miserable  persons,  of  his  own  selection,  20-s  in  food  and  drink." 

11.  The  Altar  of  S.  Stephen  and  S.  Lawrence,  the  Martyrs,  was  situated 
behind  the  great  Altar,  and  was  endowed  in  1480  for  the  Sustentatioii  of  a 
Chaplain,  by  James  Lindsay,  Dean  of  Glasgow,  with  half  of  the  Lands  of 
Scroggs,  in  the  Barony  of  Stobo,  an  annual  of  10  Merks  from  S.  Gelisgrange, 
Edinburgh,  and  with  other  Eents. 

12.  The  Altar  of  Corpus  Christi  in  the  Nave,  or  Ambulatorium,  at  the 
fourth  Pillar  from  the  Eood-Loft,  was  constructed  with  hewn  and  polished 
stones,  by  Eobert,  Canon  and  Prebendary  of  Glasgow.     It  was  endowed  by 
him  in  1487  for  a  Chaplain,  whose  Eevenues  arose  from  annual  Eents  and 
Tenements  in  the  City. 

13.  The  Altar  of  S.  Nicolas,  in  the  Lower  Church  of  Glasgow,  was  en 
dowed  in  1488,  by  Michael  Fleming,  a  Canon,  with  a  Eevenue  of  5  Merks 
.(4s  8(/),  as  half  a  Cliaplainry.     He  gave  also  20*  for  an  Obit  to  be  performed 
by  the  Vicars. 

14.  The  Altar  of  S.  James  the  Apostle  was  situated  in  the    Choir, 
between  the  Altar  of  S.  Stephen  and  S.  Lawrence  on  the  South,  and  the 
Altar  of  S.  Martin  on  the  North.     It  was  endowed  with  Eents  from  Tene 
ments  by  Martin  Wan,  Chancellor  of  the  Diocese,  in  1496. 

15.  The  Altar  of  the  Holy  Cross  received  an  endowment  for  a  Chaplain 
in  1497,  from  Malcolm  Durans,  Prebendary  of  Govan. 

10.  The  Altar  of  S.  Peter  and  S.  Paul  was  situated  in  the  Lower  Church, 
between  the  Altar  of  S.  Nicolas  on  the  North,  and  the  Altar  of  S.  Andrew 
011  the  South.  It  was  endowed  for  a  perpetual  Chaplain  by  Thomas 
Forsith,  Prebendary  of  Logy,  in  the  Cathedral  of  Eoss,  in  1498. 

17.  The  Altar  of  the  Name   of  Jesus  was  on  the  North  side  of  the 
Entrance   of  the    Church.     It  was  founded  and  endowed  for  a  perpetual 
Chaplain  bv  Archbishop  Eobert,  from  a  part  of  the  Eental  of  Craigrossy,  in 
1503. 

18.  The  Altar  of  S.  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  Archbishop  and  Martyr, 
was  founded  by  Adam  Colquhoun,  Canon  of  Glasgow,  and  Eector  of  Stobo, 
who  Died  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1542.     It  stood  in  the  Nave  of  the 
Church,  and  was  endowed  from  Lands  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  City. 

19.  There  was  also  an  Altar  Dedicated  to  S.  Andrew ;  an  Altar  (in  the 
Nave)  Dedicated  to  S.  Christopher;  an  Altar  of  "  the  Holy  Elude;"  and  a 
Chapel  called  the  Darnley  Chapel. 

Besides  those  required  for  the  Service  of  these  Altars  and  Chapels, 
other  Chaplains  were  endoAved  in  the  Cathedral  for  general  or  special 
purposes,  whose  Ministrations  do  not  seem  to  have  been  confined  to 


THE  INVENTORY.  451 

particular  Altars.  At  least  ten  such  Chaplains  occur  in  the  Becords  of  this 
Church,  one  of  which  was  founded  by  Bohert  II.  while  Steward  of  Scotland, 
as  the  price  of  the  Papal  Dispensation  for  his  Marriage  with  Elizabeth 
More.  Numerous  Anniversaries  or  Obits  were  celebrated,  chiefly  by  the 
Choral  Vicars,  for  Benefactors  and  persons  who  founded  and  endowed  them. 
The  maintenance  of  the  Lights  for  the  general  Service  of  the  Cathedral 
was  provided  for  by  gifts  from  Walter  Fitz-Alan  before  1165  ;  William  the 
Lion,  1165-89;  Robert  de  Lundoniis,  1175-99;  and  several  others.  In 
1481,  John,  the  Bishop,  gave  six  Stones  of  Wax  yearly,  to  be  used_in 
Candles,  in  Brazen  Sconces  between  the  Pillars,  all  round  from  the  High 
Altar  to  the  Entrance  of  the  Choir.  [Or'uj.  ParocJi.] 

INVENTORY. 

[Translated  from  the  Collections  of  John  Dillon,  Vice-President  of  the  Maitland  Club.  1831.] 
In  the  Name  of  God.  Amen.— Ini-en tonj  of  all  the  Ornaments,  Reliques, 
and  Jewels,  of  the  Church  of  Glasgow,  made  by  order  of  the  Lord 
Bishop  and  Chapter  of  the  said  Church,  by  the  venerable  men,  Masters 
David  de  Cadzow,  Singer ;  Robert  de  Moffatt,  Treasurer ;  William  de 
Govan  and  Thomas  Wan,  Canons  of  the  said  Church  of  Glasgow— on 
the  24th  of  March,  1432. 

1.  One  Chalice,  with  a  Paten,  of  pure  Gold.  2.  Five  large  and  beauti 
ful  Chalices  of  Silver,  well  gilt,  with  the  Patens.  3.  One  Cup  of  Silver,  gilt, 
without  Cover.  4.  Two  Phials  of  Silver,  gilt,  of  a  good  size  for  Chrisms 
and  Holy  Oil,  on  three  Foot- Stands,  one  higher  and  the  other  lower.  5. 
Nine  Phials  or  Cruets  of  smaller  size,  of  Silver,  for  the  use  of  the  High 
Altar.  6.  Two  Pastoral  Staves,  one  solemn  (grand),  gilt  all  over;  and  one, 
less  solemn,  with  the  Top  gilt.  7.  Two  Mitres,  one  solemn,  with  the 
ground  formed  of  Pearls,  and  finely  adorned  with  a  variety  of  Precious 
Stones  ;  and  another,  less  solemn  (grand),  of  Damask,  adorned  with  Precious 
Stones  and  Silver-gilt,  8.  Another  Mitre  of  White  Damask,  with  Gold 
Bordures,  without  Precious  Stones.  9.  Four  Pairs  of  Gloves  for  the  Bishop. 
10.  One  Pair  of  Gloves,  with  two  Precious  Buckles  to  fasten  them.  11. 
Two  very  valuable  Clasps,  ornamented  with  Pearls  and  other  Precious  Stones. 
12.  Four  Precious  Clasps  for  Copes,  bearing  the  Embroidered  Image  of  the 
Annunciation  of  the  Blessed  Virgin ;  another,  more  precious,  representing 
her  Coronation  ;  a  third,  with  the  Image  of  the  Crucifix  ;  a  fourth,  with  the 
Image  of  our  Lord  seated  on  a  Throne  with  the  four  Evangelists,  one  or 
either  in  the  four  corners  ;  all  of  Silver,  richly  gilt.  13.  A  Cross,  or  the 
Image  of  the  Crucifix,  with  two  Collateral  Figures  of  goodly  size,  of  Silver, 
well  gilt,  entrusted  to  the  keeping  of  the  Sacristan. 

In  Jciccls — ?•/:.,  Precious  Stones,  liinys,  and  other  Articles. 
1.  One  Clasp,  or  Buckle,  of  Gold,  adorned  with  Pearls  and  other 
Precious  Stones,  with  a  Porphiry  in  the  middle  of  a  green  colour.  2. 
Eighteen  Precious  Stones,  of  red  colour,  for  the  Shrine  of  S.  Kentigern,  in 
one  paper.  8.  Twenty-six  Precious  Stones,  of  various  colours,  for  the  same 
Shrine,  preserved  in  another  paper.  4.  Twenty-six  other  Precious  Stones, 
of  different  colours,  for  the  same  Shrine,  in  another  paper.  5.  Four 
Buttons,  or  Hooks,  of  Oriental  Pearls,  for  the  Cope.  6.  Eight  Monilia,  or 


452  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Brooches,  of  Gold,  with  Precious  Stones,  kept  in  a  Wooden  Case,  for  the 
Shrine.  7.  A  small  Silver  Chain,  kept  in  the  same  Case.  8.  In  a  small 
Wooden  Box,  various  broken  Stones,  with  a  gilded  King,  having  one  Stone. 
0.  In  Money,  for  the  Shrine,  Twenty-Six  Pounds  and  Fifteen  Shillings, 
reckoning  the  Ilalf-a-Pound  for  Eight  Shillings,  and  the  Lion  for  Five 
Shillings.  10.  Also,  in  Bullion,  for  the  Bishop,  as  valued,  about  £20. 

In  lu'liijitt'x. 

1.  A  Silver  Cross,  gilt  in  front,  and  adorned  with  Precious  Stones, 
fixed  on  a  Pedestal  of  Silver,  containing  a  small  portion  of  the  true  Cross  of 
our  Lord.  2.  Another  Cross  of  Silver,  gilt,  ornamented  with  Precious 
Stones,  with  another  Particle  of  the  true  Cross  of  Christ.  3.  A  Phial,  or 


bury,  and  another  portion  of  the  Hair  Shirt  of  our  Patron,  Kentigern, 
as  appears  in  the  Schedule.  5.  In  another  small  Case  of  Silver,  gilt,  a 
Particle  of  the  Skin  of  S.  Bartlrolomew,  the  Apostle,  as  it  appears  in  the 
Schedule.  G.  In  another  Case  of  Silver,  gilt,  a  Bone  of  S.  Ninian.  7. 
In  another  small  Case  of  Silver,  gilt,  a  portion  of  the  Girdle  of  the  Blessed 
Virgin  Mary.  8.  In  a  Casket  of  Crystal,  a  Bone  of  some  Saint,  supposed 
to  be  S.  Niuian.  9.  In  a  small  Phial  of  Crystal,  a  Portion  of  the  Milk  of 
the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary.  10.  In  another  small  Phial  of  Silver,  gilt,  a 
small  Portion  of  the  Girdle  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary,  and  a  small  Portion 
of  the  Crib  of  our  Lord.  11.  In  another  small  Phial,  of  yellow  colour,  the 
Oil  which  flowed  from  the  Tomb  of  S.  Kentigern — "In  una  parvula  fiola 
croci,  oleum  quod  manavit  de  tumba  Sancti  Kentigerni."  12.  Another 
Phial,  containing  a  Portion  of  the  Bones  of  SS.  Blasius  and  Eugene.  13. 
In  another  small  Phial  of  Silver,  a  Fragment  of  the  Tomb  of  S.  Catherine, 
Virgin.  14.  A  little  Bag,  containing  a  Portion  of  the  Mantle  of  S.  Martin, 
as  it  appears  from  the  Schedule.  15.  One  Precious  Bag,  with  the  Combs 
[Penitential  or  Scratching  Instruments]  of  SS.  Kentigern  and  Thomas  of 
Canterbury.  !('».  Four  other  Bags,  with  Bones  of  Saints,  and  other  small 
lieliques.  17.  A  Wooden  Case,  with  many  small  lleliuucs.  18.  Two  small 
Linen  Bags,  with  Bones  of  SS.  Kentigern,  Thenew,  and  other  divers  Saints. 

Sili'er  TV.«r/.s  in  kccptnij  of  the  Sacristan.' 

1.  Four  Chalices,  gilt.  2.  Two  Chalices  of  Silver,  not  gilt.  3.  One 
Chalice,  gilt,  for  the  Altar  of  the  Holy  Virgin  Mary,  which  was  given  by  Mr. 
David  of  Cadzow,  Precentor,  to  the  same  Altar,  for  perpetual  use.  4.  One 
Chalice  of  Silver,  which  was  formerly  given  by  Mr.  John  of  Hawick,  of  good 
memory,  Precentor  of  the  Church  of  Glasgow,  for  the  Altar  of  S.  Peter.  5. 
One  Chalice  of  Silver,  for  the  Altar  of  S.  John  the  Baptist,  which  Mr.  John 
Stewart,  of  good  memory,  once  Sub-Dean  of  the  said  Church,  founded.  0. 
A  small  Bell  of  Silver  for  the  High  Altar.  7.  Two  large  Phials,  or  Cruets, 
of  Silver,  for  the  Chrism  and  Oil ;  and  others  sent  to  the  Lord  Bishop,  but 
now  sent  back.  8.  One  Basin,  with  the  Lavatory  of  Silver,  for  the  Altar. 
9.  One  Silver  Dish.  10.  Two  small  Cruets  of  Silver,  all  for  the  High  Altar. 
11.  Two  Thuribles  of  Silver,  one  large  and  the  other  small.  12.  One  Boat 
of  Silver  for  the  Incense.  13.  One  round  Pix,  for  keeping  the  Bread  [i.e.,  of 
the  Blessed  Sacrament]  at  the  High  Altar.  14.  One  Case,  or  Monstrance,  of 


THE  INYENTOEY.  453 

Silver,  richly  gilt,  for  carrying  the  Blessed  Eucharist  in  Procession.     15. 
One  Yat  of  Silver,  with  the  Asperges  for  the  Holy  Water. 

VentiiientuJ'iir  ike  Bisho})  and  his  Ministers. 

1.  One  Chasuhle,  with  four  Dalmatics,  three  Albs,  Stoles,  and  other 
Vestments,  except  the  Copes,  of  Brown  Violet,  with  Images  in  the  Trimmings. 
2.  Another  entire  Set  of  Vestments  for  the  Bishop  and  Ministers,  with  a 
Cope ;  having  the  ground  of  Red  Silk,  with  Flowers  of  Gold  and  Images  in 
the  Trimmings.  8.  A  third  entire  Set  of  ATestments  for  the  Bishop  and 
Ministers,  of  different  colours,  with  a  Cope  wrought  in  Gold,  but  having  only 
three  Dalmatics  and  Tunics.  4.  A  fourth  Set  of  Vestments  for  the  Bishop 
and  his  Ministers,  with  a  Cope,  having  the  ground  of  Red  Silk  interwoven 
with  Flowers  of  Green  Silk  and  Gold,  not  very  grand.  5.  One  entire  Set 
of  Vestments  of  Black  Silk  for  the  Bishop  and  his  Ministers,  with  two  Copes, 
having  golden  Trimmings.  G.  An  entire  Set  of  Vestments  for  the  Bishop 
and  Ministers,  of  White  Silk,  with  two  Copes  of  the  same,  with  Golden 
Ornaments,  and  Images  of  Silk.  7.  A  White  Cope  of  Silk,  with  Golden 
Ornaments  mixed  with  Images.  8.  A  grand  Cope,  with  Crimson  ground, 
having  Gold  Ornaments  filled  with  Images.  1).  A  precious  Cope,  without 
any  other  Vestments,  with  Crimson  ground,  having  Golden  Ornaments  fully 
strewn  with  cum  ^n-nqi.  [with  porcii jitney.'}  and  Golden  Flowers.  10.  Two 
Red  Copes  of  double  Satin,  with  Golden  Ornaments.  11.  One  Stole  with 
Maniple,  without  any  other  Vestments,  with  Fastenings  of  Purple  and  Gold. 

12.  One  Solemn  Vestment  for  the  Sacristan  only,  with  a  Frontal  and  two 
Baudkyus  [Canopies '?] 'of  Crimson  Velvet,  with  Red  Images  of  Gold,  and 
very  grand  Ornaments,  which  were  procured  by  John,  Bishop  of  Glasgow. 

13.  Three  Pontificals,  one  more  ancient  and  two  more  modern. 

The  above  Episcopal  Articles  arc  kept  in  the  Presses  of  the  Bishop. 


1.  One  entire  Set  of  Vestments  for  the  High  Altar— that  is,  for  the  Priest 
and  Ministers — of  Red  Silk,  with  Silk  Ornaments  of  different  colours, 
without  a  Cope.  2.  Another  entire  Set  of  Vestments  for  the  Priest,  Deacon, 
and  Sub-Deacon,  of  White  Silk,  interwoven  with  Gold,  having  Golden 
Ornaments  and  Silk  Images  embroidered,  with  four  Canopies  [Baudkyns]  of 
the  same.  8.  One  Chasuble,  with  two  Dalmatics,  of  Green  Silk  with  Golden 
Ornaments.  4.  Another  entire  Set  of  Vestments,  with  three  Dalmatics  of 
differently  coloured  Silk.  5.  Two  Canopies  for  the  High  Altar  of  Red  Silk, 
gilt,  having  in  the  middle  of  both  Black  Damask,  given  lately  by  a  gentle 
man.  G.  ""Two  Canopies  of  Red  Silk,  gilt,  given  to  the  Church  by  the 
Cardinal,  as  appears  by  his  Coat  of  Arms,  embroidered.  7.  Two  Brown 
Canopies,  with  Coat  of  Arms.  8.  Five  old  Canopies  for  the  High  Altar,  of 
Silk,  of  different  colours.  9.  One  Towel  or  Altar  Cloth  for  the  High  Altar, 
with  a  Fringe  having  Images  of  Gold.  10.  Another  Altar  Cloth,  with  the 
Fringe  having  Golden  Crowns  all  over ;  a  third  of  Red  Silk,  with  the  Front 
ornamented  with  Flowers  and  Leaves  ;  a  fourth  with  the  Front  of  Hyacinth 
Silk,  embroidered  with  Flowers  and  Golden  Fleurs-de-lis.  11.  Two  Towels 
or  Altar  Cloths  of  Green  and  Red  Silk,  embroidered  with -the  Coat  of  Arms 
of  the  Laird  of  Cadzow.  12.  A  costly  Altar  Cloth,  with  Golden  Figures  and 
French  precious  Lilies.  13.  Three  Towels  or  Altar  Cloths,  with  a  Frontal. 
14.  One  Altar  Cloth,  with  a  Frontal  and  two  Cushions  of  White  Damask, 


454  THE  BEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

given  by  Mr.  Andrew  HaAvick.  15.  Two  Cushions  of  Eecl  bilk,  with  the  Coat 
of  Arms  of  the  Lord  Cardinal.  Hi.  Two  Cushions  of  Green  Silk.  17.  An 
entire  Set  of  Vestments,  with  Golden  Ornaments  of  White  Silk,  with  the 
Towel  given  by  James  Cameron.  18.  An  entire  Set  of  Priestly  Vestments, 
of  Green  Stuff,  for  the  Altar  of  S.  Martin.  10.  An  entire  'Set  of  Vest 
ments  for  the  High  Altar,  with  the  Vestments  for  the  Deacon  and  Sub- 
Deacon  of  variegated  Linen.  20.  An  entire  Set  of  Vestments  for  the  Mass 
of  the  Dead,  without  Alb.  '21.  An  entire  Set  of  Vestments,  for  the  Priest 
only,  of  Persian  or  Royal  Silk,  interwoven  with  Crowns  of  Gold,  with  two 
Altar  Cloths  having  Fringes.  22.  Vestments  for  the  Priest  only,' with  Albs 
and  other  things,  vix.,  one  of  Silk  and  the  other  of  [Burdalx]  for  the  Altar 
of  S.  John  the  Baptist,  given  by  John  Stewart,  of  good  memory,  Sub-Dean 
of  Glasgow,  with  four  Cloths  or  Towels  for  the  Altar.  23.  One  Set  of  Vest 
ments,  very  valuable,  of  Hyacinth  Silk,  for  the  Priest,  with  an  Alb  and 
Ornaments  of  the  same  Silk,  and  two  Canopies  of  the  same,  given  to  the 
Altar  of  S.  Katherine  by  Matthew,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  of  good  memory. 
21.  One  Ferial  Vestment,  which  serves  for  the  Altars  of  S.  Katherine  and 
of  S.  Martin.  25.  Two  large  and  very  precious  Cushions  of  Persian  or 
Hyacinth  Silk  for  the  High  Altar,  with  the  Arms  of  the  present  Bishop, 
given  by  the  same. 

CojH'H  in  l/u'  Icci'jii/Kj  of  the  Sui'risUni. 

1.  A  very  precious  Cope  of  Brown  Damask,  mixed  with  Gold,  having 
Images  of  Gold,  presented  to  the  Chancellor,  with  the  Arms  of  John 
Stewart,  Earl  of  Lennox,  of  good  memory,  and  of  Lord  Darnley.  2.  Another 
Cope  of  Brown  Damask,  goodly  precious,  mixed  with  Gold,  Avith  Gold 
Images,  presented  to  the  Church  by  Mr.  David  Cadzow,  then  Prebendary  of 
Tarbolton.  3.  One  precious  Cope,  of  Red  Silk,  with  Pearls  mixed  with 
Gold,  with  Gold  Images,  presented  to  the  Church  of  Glasgow  by  Mr.  John 
de  Ilawick.  Precentor  of  the  said  Church, — On  whose  soul  God  have  mercy. 
4.  One  precious  Cope  of  Red  and  Green  Velvet,  mixed  with  Gold  Flowers 
and  Leaves,  with  Gold  Images,  very  precious,  given  to  the  Church  by  John 
Senescall,  of  good  memory,  once  Sub-Dean  of  said  Church.  5.  One  Cope  of 
Persian  Silk,  mixed  with  Beasts,  Leaves,  and  Flowers,  with  Images  of  Gold 
Silk.  G.  A  Cope  of  Red  Silk,  with  Gold  Devices  and  Images  in  Silk.  7. 
A  Cope  of  Brown  Silk,  mixed  with  Beasts  of  Gold  and  linages  of  Silk.  8. 
A  Cope  of  Brown  Silk,  full  of  Golden  Beasts,  with  Silk  Trimmings.  9.  A 
Cope  of  Pied  Crimson,  full  of  Images,  with  Silk  Mountings.  10.  A  Cope  of 
Red.  Silk,  with  Images  and  Golden  Beasts,  with  Gold  Mountings.  11.  A 
Cope  of  Green  Silk,  with  Gold  Mountings.  12.  A  Cope  of  Persian  Silk, 
mixed  Avith  Golden  Birds  and  Beasts,  with  Gold  Mountings.  13.  A  Cope  of 
White  Silk,  mixed  with  Rays  and  Golden  Stars,  with  Gold  Mountings.  14. 
A  Cope  of  Red  Silk,  with  Golden  Eagles.  15.  Three  other  Green  Copes  of 
Silk,  with  Mountings.  10.  Three  White  Copes  of  Silk,  of  one  colour,  with 
White  Mountings  of  the  same  colour.  17.  A  Silk  Cope  of  divers  colours. 
18.  A  large  Hanging  of  Arras  of  the  Life  of  S.  Kentigern,  and  three  Carpets 
with  Crowns,  &c.  19.  Four  Curtains,  or  Reredos,  for  the  Great  Altar — 
White,  Red,  Green,  and  Black. 

Books  1>t'l(»i(/i>t(/  to  tJic  Cli/iir, 

1.  A  beautiful  Missal,  for  the  Great  Altar,  noted  in  Music,  and  bound 
in  White  Skin.  2.  Another  Missal  of  smaller  size,  noted,  bound  in  Red 


THE  INVENTORY.  155 

Skin.     3.  A  Missal  for  the  Altar  of  S.  Katlicrine,  neither  noted  nor  illumi 
nated,  bound  in  White   Skin.     4.  A  Missal  of  S.  Martin,  noted,  bound  in 
White  Skin,  of  a  large  size.     5.  A  large  Missal  for  the  Altar  of  S.  John  the 
Baptist,  not  noted,  bound  in  White  Skin,  sent  by  John  Stewart,  of  good 
memory,  once  Sub-Dean  of  Glasgow.     0.  A  Missal,  of  small  size,  for  the 
Altar  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  sent  by  Gilbert  Musfald,  once  an  Official.     7. 
A  largo  Missal,  not  noted,  sent  for  the  Altar  of  S.  Andrew,  by  Nicholas 
Greenlaw,  Dean.     8.  A  Missal  of  small  si/e,  noted,  sent  for  the  Altar  of 
S.  Nicholas  by  Mr.  Hugo  Rae,  once   Sub-Dean  of  Glasgow.     9.  A  Missal 
noted,  bound  in  White  Skin,  pretty  large,  for  the  Altar  of  the  Apostles  Peter 
and  Paul.     10.  A  Missal,  in  two  Volumes,  for  the  Altar  of  S.  Stephen, 
which  was   used  in  the  time   of  Mr.   Thomas   Marshall.     11.  A  Book  of 
Epistles  with  the  Gospels,  for  the  Great  Altar,  bound  in  White  Skin,  of 
large  size.     12.  A  Catholicon,'::  very  costly,  bound  in  White  Skin,  chained 
near  the  Great  Altar.     13.  A  beautiful  Bible,  of  the  Old  Testament,  in  two 
large  Volumes,   bound  in  White   Skin.      11.  One  beautiful  Legendary  of 
Saints,  bound  in  White  Skin.     15.  One  lesser  Legendary,  not  bound.  "  16. 
One  Breviary,  noted,  solemn,  sent  for  the  Erskine  Stallby  Mr.  John  Car- 
rick.     17.  Another  large  Portiforium,  bound  in  White  Skin.     18.  A  third 
Portiforium,  noted,  a  smaller  Volume,  bound  in  White  Skin.     19.  A  fourth 
Portiforium,  noted,  bound  in  White  Skin,  sent  by  Thomas  de  Barry  for  the 
Ancrum  Stall,  which  lie  possessed  at  one  time.     20.  One  Breviary  for  those 
without  the  Choir.     21.  One  Breviary  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  William  Govan. 
22.  One  Breviary,  well  noted,  given  by  Mr.  David  Cadzow,  for  use  out  of 
the  Church — (So  there  arc  Seven  Breviaries  belonging  to  the  Church  at  the 
time  when  this  Inventory  Avas  taken).     23.  One  Psalter,  by  itself,  bound  in 
White  Skin,  given  by  the  Cardinal  for  the  Renfrew  Stall,  and  chained  to  it. 
24.  One  Psalter,  by  itself,  chained  to  the  Dean's  Stall.     25.  One  Psalter, 
by  itself,  chained  to  the  first  Stall.     20.  One  Psalter,  given  by  John  Senes- 
call,  once  Sub-Dean  of  Glasgow,  chained  in  the  middle  of  the  Choir,  bound 
in  White  Skin — (So  there  are  five  separate  Psalters  belonging  to  the  Church). 
27.  One  Antiphonarium,  of  large  size,  at  the  Dean's  Stall,  bound  in  White 
Skin.     28.  Another  Antiphonarium,   bound  in  White  Skin.     29.  A  third 
Antiphonarium,  of  large  size,  bound  in  White  Skin,  with  the  Psalter.     30. 
A  fourth  Antiphonarium,  without  the  Psalter,  bound  in  White  Skin.     31. 
An  Antiphonarium,  with  the  Psalter,  bound  in  White  Skin.     32.  An  Anti 
phonarium,  of  large  size,  without  the  Psalter,  bound  in  White  Skin.     33. 
An  Antiphonarium  for  the  Masters  of  the  Choir,  with  the  Psalter,  bound  in 
White  Skin — (So  there  are  seven  Antiphouaria,  and  all  in  the  Church  at  the 
time  of  this  Inventory).     34.  Three  new  Graduals,  of  large  size,  bound  in 
White  Skin,  with  three  lesser  ones— (There  are  six  Graduals  in  the  Church  ; 
but  there  are  four  taken  out  of  the  Church,  nobody  knows  by  whom).     35. 
Four  Processionalia,  in  the  Church  ;  and  one  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Richard 
Hay,  for  binding.     30.  One  Book  of  Collects,  bound  in  White  Skin.     37. 

::  This  Gatholicoii,  or  Great  Dictionary  of  the  Latin  Tongue,  compiled  by 
Joluunics  Ballnix,  Januensis  (or  of  Genoa),  was  the  Dictionary  chieily  used  in  those 
times,  and  was  Printed  so  early  as  li(iO.  It  is  a  Book  of  great  size.  There  are  two 
MS.  Copies  of  it  in  the  Hunterian  Museum,  Glasgow,  each  in  two  immense  Volumes, 
one  marked  with  the  name  of  Peter  Barman.  A  sight  of  these  and  such  like  Books 
helps  one  to  form  an  idea  of  their  great  value,  especially  when  all  executed  in  beauti 
ful  Penmanship,  and  magnificently  illuminated  on  Vellum. 


456  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

One  Book  of  Legends,  gilt,  chained  to  the  Sub-Dean's  Stall,  bound  in  White 
Skin.  38.  One  Ordiuarium,  chained  to  the  Precentor's  Stall,  bound  in 
White  Skin.  39.  The  Life  of  S.  Keutigern,  and  also  of  S.  Servanus,  in  a 
small  Volume,  chained  to  the  Precentor's  Stall.  -10.  An  Epistle  of  S.  Paul, 
in  a  large  Volume,  chained  to  the  Stall  of  Stobo.  41.  A  Pontifical,  in  two 
Volumes.  -12.  Another  Pontifical,  in  two  Volumes,  solemn. 


1.  One  old  I'ldidrctnni,  folio,  in  one  shelf.  2.  Institutions,  with  ten 
Collections  of  Civil  Law,  in  the  same  shelf,  in  one  Volume  ;  and  a  new 
I'audeclinn,  in  the  same  shelf.  3.  A  History  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  in 
n  beautiful  Volume,  in  the  same  shelf.  4.  One  Book  of  Hymns,  Collects, 
and  Chapters,  in  beautiful  letter.  5.  A  Treatise  of  S.  Augustine — two 
Sermons  on  the  Psalms.  6.  A  Book  of  Decretals,  a  beautiful  Volume.  7. 
A  Book  of  the  same  by  Mr.  Jo.  Poysley.  8.  A  Book  of  the  Presbyter  Bede 
—40  Homilies  on  the  Gospels,  on  paper.  9.  A  Book  of  Theology,  with  the 
Arms  of  the  Cardinal  of  Scotland,  in  small  letter.  10.  A  small  Volume — 
the  Sermons  of  S.  Bernard.  11.  A  large  Book  of  Sermons  of  Pope  Leo, 
with  a  smaller  Book  of  Sermons  of  the  same  Pope.  12.  In  the  third  shelf, 
in  the  Nave  of  the  Church,  a  large  Volume  of  Augustine — 7  Yr  misxaw  quidem. 
13.  A  Book  on  the  Symbol  of  the  Faith  [the  Creed  or  the  Cross  /],  by  S. 
Jerome.  14.  Valerius  Maximus.  ly.  A  Book  of  Peter  Damian,  called 
(Treeisnnts.  16.  One  Volume  containing  the  Statutes  of  the  Council  of 
Tyrone.  17.  A  Book  of  Exposition  of  the  Psalter.  18.  A  little  Book, 
called  Metamorjihoses.  19.  The  Rhetoric  of  Aristotle,  translated  into  Latin. 
20.  A  large  Volume,  in  Parchment,  called  Xonts  Decanux  <1«  Coi/ditiouilnis 
Annanonim.  21.  The  Senteutiic  of  Friar  Richard,  of  the  Order  of  Minorites, 
on  the  Books  of  Ethics,  having  on  the  first  leaf,  What  is  Virtue..'  22.  Friar 
Peter  upon  Four  of  the  ficnteittur.  23.  The  third  and  fourth  Books  of  Bona- 
venture.  24.  The  Book  of  Augustine  against  the  Heretic  Faustiu.  25. 
The  Book  of  Franciscus  Petrarch.  26.  A  little  Book,  which  begins,  7"7,sY 
Mnnjarite.  27.  The  latter  Exposition  of  Aristotle.  28.  Gains  Crispus  and 
Sallust,  in  a  large  Volume.  29.  Sermons  for  Sundays,  in  paper — with  a 
number  of  other  little  Books,  whose  names  we  do  not  know. 

Books  belonging  to  tlic  Church  of  Glas/jtnc — without,  in  other  hands. 

1.  Henry  Boece,  the  gift  of  William  Adie,  Rector  of  Luss,  in  the  hands 
of  Mr.  Jo.  Wischard  for  life.  2.  Braco,  the  gift  of  Mr.  Lawder,  one  time 
Bishop  of  Glasgow,  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Alexander  Lawder  for  life  ;  he  has 
also  Speculum  Jmliciule,  under  pledge  to  be  restored  at  the  desire  of  the 
Chapter.  3.  tiententnc  Bartholornei  de  Pis,  given  by  Mr.  John  Stewart,  at 
one  time  Sub-Dean,  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Robert  Moffat,  at  the  will  of  the 
Chapter.  4.  Liber  Boetii,  with  Gloria  Triuitalis,  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  John 
Legate,  at  the  will  of  the  Chapter. 

Books  in  tJte  Ecclesiastical  Library  of  the  Cathedral  of  Glasnoic. 

1.  In  the  Western  Press,  in  the  North  Corner,  a  Book  of  Theology  on 
Faith  and  its  Abuse,  illuminated  in  gold,  but  deficient  in  binding.  2.  A 
Book  on  the  Theology  of  S.  Thomas,  second  part.  3.  An  Ecclesiastical 
History,  a  beautiful  Volume.  4.  The  Morals  of  Aristotle,  beautifully 
illuminated.  5  to  10.  Books  of  S.  Thomas  Acquinas,  the  last  Volume 


THE  INVENTOEY.  457 

beautifully  illuminated  in  gold.  11.  A  Volume  of  S.  Bonaventura.  12. 
John  Douns,  a  subtle  Doctor,  on  the  iii.  and  iiij.  of  the  Sententuc,  which 
begins  Circa  Incanuitioncm.  13.  Siinima  CojiJ'esaonun,  a  beautiful  Volume. 
14.  Second  Book  of  a  subtle  Scot.  15.  A  Concordance  of  the  Bible, 
illuminated  in  gold.  1C.  A  beautiful  Volume  on  the  Five  Books  of  Moses. 
17.  Apostilla  Nicholai  de  Lira  on  the  Evangels.  18.  One  entire  Bible,  a 
beautiful  Volume,  illuminated  in  gold.  19.  A  Book  of  Questions  on 
Theology,  20.  A  Book  on  four  of  the  Llbri  Scntentlanun.  of  one  English 
Doctor.  21.  Apostilla  super  Psalterium  Nicholai  de  Lira.  22.  Glossary  of 
S.  Paul's  Epistles,  finely  illuminated  in  gold.  23.  An  Exposition  Pmlo- 
ijoruni  BibUe,  a  small  Volume.  24.  S.  Augustine's  Apostilla,  or  Exposition 
of  the  Psalter. 

Boo  lea  in  the  Second  Press. 

1.  Justinian's  Codex,  beautifully  illuminated  in  gold.  2.  An  old  Folio. 
3.  Another.  4.  A  new  Folio,  illuminated  in  gold.  5.  A  small  Volume, 
being  a  Course  of  Civil  Law,  given  by  Mr.  John  Stewart,  &c.  C.  Speculum 
J  mild  ah.  7.  Summa  c<>i>io»(/.  8.  A  Book  of  Invocations.  9.  A  Book  of 
Decrees.  10.  Another  Book  of  Decrees.  11.  A  Book  of  Aristotle,  beautiful. 
12.  A  Book  of  Decretals.  13.  A  beautiful  Volume,  having  the  Epistles  of 
Bernard,  of  Clairvall,  and  of  Otlio.  14.  A  Preface  on  Genesis.  15.  A 
Lecture  on  the  Scnteittia-  by  Friar  Gregory.  1G.  An  Ecclesiastical  History. 
17.  A  certain  beautiful  Volume  of  Mr.  Hugo  Paris.  18.  A  Bible,  beauti 
fully  illuminated,  with  the  New  and  Old  Testaments.  19.  A  Treatise  of  S. 
Augustine  on  the  Evangels.  20.  A  Book  of  Questions,  composed  by  Richard 
Randulph.  21.  A  beautiful  Volume  011  the  Mechanism  of  Heaven  and 
Earth— about  Generation  and  Corruption  ;  with  many  other  Treatises.  22. 
A  beautiful  Volume,  bound  in  Red  Skin.  23.  A  Book  of  Abbot  Odo.  24. 
A  Volume,  bound  in  Red  Skin. 

Books  in  the  Third  Press. 

1.  Book  of  Sermons,  in  paper.  2.  Book  of  Sentences.  3.  Epistles  of 
Paul  to  Seneca.  4.  S.  Augustine's  Sermons.  5.  Sum  of  the  Theology  of 
Bradwardin.  G.  Aristotle's  Rhetoric.  7.  PixtoU  of  S.  Augustine.  8.  First 
Volume  on  the  Sin  of  Adam.  9.  S.  Clement's  Epistles.  10.  The  Book  of 
Landulph.  U.S.  Augustine  on  the  Worship  of  God.  12.  Treatise  of  Jo. 
Forrest  on  the  Sente>iii<t>.  13.  Sum  of  Holy  Theology.  14.  S.  Augustine 
on  the  Rules  of  true  Faith.  15.  Lecture  on  the  first  of  the  Sentential,  Edited 
by  Friar  Gregory.  1G.  Book  on  the  Pastoral  of  the  Blessed  Gregory.  17. 
Book  of  Collations.  18.  A  Tractate  of  Faith  against  divers  errors.  19. 
Book  of  Bonaventure,  upon  the  third  of  the  Soitciitia.  20.  One  Book  of  the 
Blessed  Augustine  l)e  Civitatc.  21.  Peter  of  Torrens  on  the  fourth  of  the 
Sententia. 


VOL.  II. 


•158  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 


BISHOPS   OF   THE   SEE   OF   GLASGOW. 

I.  MUNGO,  or  KEXTIGERX.     A.D.  560-601. 

Some  people  are  of  opinion  that  the  Episcopal  See  of  Glas 
gow  was  Founded  by  S.  Kentigern,  A.D.  560  [Ken net's  Parochial 
Antiquities]  ;  but  others  are  of  another  mind,  holding  this  Kenti 
gern,  al.  Mungo,  to  have  been  only  a  Religious  man,  who  had  a 
Cell  there,  and  for  whose  sanctity  posterity  had  such  a  venera 
tion  that  they  dedicated  the  Cathedral  Church  afterwards  to  his 
memory ;  and  he  has  still  been,  and  is  to  this  day,  reckoned  the 
"Tutelar  Saint"  (as  men  choose  to  express  it)  of  both  the 
Church  and  the  City  of  Glasgow.  It  would  appear  that,  about 
King  David  I.'s  time,  people  did  not  take  S.  Kentigern  to  have 
been  a  Bishop,  but  rather  a  Confessor  and  holy  Martyr ;  for,  in 
all  the  Writs  of  the  Cartulary  of  Glasgow,  he  is  never  once  styled 
Bishop,  but  sometimes  Confessor.  The  Donations  arc  always 
"Deo,  et  ecclesiae  Sti  Kentigerni,"  or  "Deo,  et  Sancto  Kenti- 
gerno  ;"  and  he  is  there  called  "  Patrono  ecclesiae  Glasguensis;" 
yet  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  in  the  Inquisition  concerning  the 
Lands,  &c.,  which  had  formerly  pertained  to  the  See  of  Glasgow, 
performed  by  David,  Earl  of  Cumberland,  brother  to  King  Alex 
ander  I.,  and  afterward  King  himself  of  Scotland,  by  the  ordinary 
appellation  of  S.  David,  Kentigern  is  expressly  titled  a  Bishop. 
But,  then,  how  far  credit  is  to  be  given  to  this  Paper  I  shall 
submit  to  other  persons  to  form  a  judgment,  after  they  have  read 
over  Sir  James  Dalrymple's  scruples  in  his  "Collections,"  p. 
337,  &c.,  and  have  considered  what  may  occur  to  themselves. 
Yet  there  are  Authors  to  be  found  who  are,  at  this  day,  pretty 
positive  that  S.  Kentigern,  al.  Mungo,  was  truly  a  Bishop,  and 
that  also  in  the  City  of  Glasgow.  [Britannia  Sacra.] 

This  Kentigern  was  Born  at  or  near  the  Town  of  Culross, 
about  A.D.  516,  and  Died  13th  January,  A.D.  601.     [Keith.] 


KKNTIGEEN.  459 

Of  Kentigern  there  is  no  contemporary  Record.  Aclamnan, 
in  his  "Life  of  Columba,"  written  80  years  after  his  Death, 
mentions  him  as  "friend  and  contemporary  of  Columba."  Bede 
is  wholly  silent  regarding  him.  A  "fragment,"  in  Latin,  of  the 
ancient  Life  of  S.  Kentigern,  written  at  the  desire  of  Herbert, 
Bishop  of  Glasgow,  is  given  in  the  Appendix  to  Innes'  Preface  of 
Ectj.  Episc.  (r/^.s.  It  gives  comical  details  of  his  Conception, 
and  ends  with  his  Birth.  Joceline,  a  Monk  of  Furness,  at  the 
bidding  of  Joceline,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  wrote  the  "  Life  and 
Miracles  of  S.  Kentigern."  Pinkerton  also  wrote  his  Life  in  his 
Vitai  Antiq.  Sanct.  AYhat  follows  is  the  Digest  of  all  these. 

Kentigern  was  the  son  (but  not  honoured  by  being  either 
begot  or  born  on  the  Marriage-Bed)  of  Ewen  Eufurien,  King  of 
Tmnbria, — viz.,  that  portion  of  Scotland  lying  South  of  the  Forth 
and  Clyde,  along  with  part  of  the  North  of  England, — and  of 
Thenau,  or  Thenew,  daughter  of  Loth,  King  of  the  Picts  or  of 
Lothian.  Spottiswoode  says  he  was  the  son  of  Thametes, 
daughter  to  Loth,  King  of  Picts,  begotten  (as  was  supposed)  by 
Eugenius,  the  third  King  of  Scots,  his  father  not  being  certainly 
known.  Posterity,  not  being  willing  that  his  Birth,  whom  they 
so  greatly  esteemed,  should  be  in  any  sort  stained,  gave  out  that 
he  was  Born  of  a  Virgin,  which  was  believed  of  simple  and 
credulous  people.  But  the  reproach  which  lay  upon  him  that 
way  he  overcame  by  his  singular  virtues. 

According  to  Tradition,  several  miraculous  circumstances 
attended  his  Birth,  and  prefigured  his  future  renown.  His 
mother,  on  the  discovery  of  her  dishonour,  was  put  into  a  frail 
Skiff  on  the  Lothian  Shore,  which  drifted  to  Culross,  in  Fife. 
There  she  brought  forth  her  son  on  the  open  shore,  and  mother 
and  child  were  found  in  the  morning  by  the  embers  of  a  dying 
fire,  and  brought  by  Shepherds  to  S.  Serf,  a  Disciple  of  S.  Pal- 
ladius,  who  had  established  a  Monastery  in  this  place ;  and  here 
the  infant  to  whom  the  erring  Thenau  gave  birth,  was  Baptized, 
nurtured,  and  taught  the  rudiments  of  the  Faith.  He  received 
the  name  of  Keiitiyeni,  but  was  also  known  by  that  of  j\hm<jo, 
which,  in  the  Celtic  tongue,  signifies  "the  dear  friend."  "When 
he  came  to  the  years  of  maturity,  he  was  warned  of  an  Angel  that 


•160  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

he  should  depart  secretly  from  Culross ;  and,  guided  by  a 
miraculous  portent,  he  took  up  his  abode  on  the  spot  where  the 
Cathedral  Church  at  Glasgow  is  now  built. 

The  only  human  thing  there  then  was  the  Cemetery,  Con 
secrated  more  than  a  Century  before  by  S.  Ninian.  His  gifts 
and  his  sanctity  were  soon  noised  abroad,  and  reached  the  ears 
of  the  King  of  Strathclyde,  who  then  had  his  dwelling  on  the 
top  of  Alcleuth — that  is,  Dumbarton  Rock,  the  Dun  of  the 
Britons.  King,  Clergy,  and  Christian  people,  what  few  of  these 
there  might  be,  came  to  Kentigern,  and  chose  him  for  their 
Bishop.  Our  young  Saint,  then  only  25,  pleads  youth,  unnt- 
ness,  desire  for  retirement  and  contemplative  life.  But  they  will 
take  no  refusal.  An  Irish  Bishop  is  summoned,  for  there  is 
none  in  Scotland,  to  Consecrate  him ;  and  Kentigern  is  ordained 
Bishop  by  the  hands  of  one  Bishop,  contrary,  confesses  Monk 
Joceline,  to  our  orthodox  Roman  usage,  which  requires  three. 
His  Episcopal  Seat  the  new  Bishop  fixes  at  Dcsclni,  "Dear 
Family,"  now  Glasgow.  No  Bishop's  Palace  there  then,  such 
as  we  are  apt  to  fancy ;  but  a  Cave  perhaps,  at  best  a  wooden 
Hut.  And  so  the  Kingdom  of  Strathclyde  existed  during  that 
Sixth  Century — the  King  on  Dumbarton  Rock,  the  Missionary 
Bishop  in  his  Hut  or  Cave  by  the  Molendinar  Burn  of  Glasgow. 
There,  beneath  the  venerable  trees  of  S.  Ninian's  Cemetery,  a 
little  Church  and  Monastery  of  wood  soon  arose.  From  this,  as 
the  chief  Seat  of  his  Mission,  S.  Mungo  spread  throughout  the 
whole  extent  of  the  British  Kingdom  of  Cumbria,  from  Loch- 
lomond,  near  Stirling,  to  Appleby  and  Wiudermere.  Glasgow 
became  the  Ecclesiastical  centre  of  this  extensive  Region — the 
spiritual  mother  of  all  the  Welsh  Tribes  of  "Reged  wide  and  fair 
Strathclyde." 

His  life  was  divided  into  two  very  distinct,  almost  opposite 
portions — boundless  and  unwearied  Activity,  and  intense  Asceti 
cism  and  solitary  Contemplation.  Instead,  however,  of  being 
opposed,  the  retirement  and  solitude,  which  made  up  one  part  of 
his  life,  fed  his  soul  with  energy  for  the  other. 

He  traversed,  without  ceasing,  the  length  and  breadth  of  the 
Kingdom,  visiting  places  100  miles  apart,  on  foot,  to  his  last  day. 


KENTIGERN.  461 

By  his  Preaching  he  converts  many  Pagans,  restores  many  who  had 
lapsed  from  the  Faith ;  for  Heresy,  Pelagian  and  other,  has  been 
rife  after  Ninian's  time  in  the  North.  He  casts  down  Temples 
and  Shrines  of  Devils  (Druidical  and  Pagan  Koman  ones),  builds 
Churches  where  he  can  (of  wood  and  wattles  doubtless),  Ordains 
Clergy,  dissolves  unnatural  Marriages,  changes  Concubinage  into 
lawful  Matrimony. 

All  the  year  round,  except  on  Church  Festivals,  he  practised 
the  most  unsparing  austerity  in  Food,  Sleep,  Clothing ;  took  all 
most  severe  measures  to  mortify  the  flesh ;  would  Fast  for  three 
or  four  days  on  end.  When  he  did  eat  it  was  only  the  sparest 
diet,  bread,  milk,  pulse,  no  meat ;  wine  never  passing  his  lips. 
If  at  any  time  he  dined  with  the  King  on  Dumbarton  Kock,  and 
had  to  relax  somewhat,  he  returned  home  to  revenge  this  on 
himself  by  redoubled  severities.  His  bed,  a  bare  hole,  hollowed 
out  of  a  rock,  like  a  cave  ;  his  pillow,  a  stone.  From  this  hard 
couch  he  would  rise  at  Midnight  for  Prayer,  and  go  through  all 
the  Psalter.  In  the  morning  he  rose  to  his  stone  bath,  a  trough 
scooped  out  of  the  rock,  and  into  this  he  plunged,  even  when  it 
was  thick  with  ice — the  coldest  weather,  the  wildest  storm,  never 
stopt  him.  Cleanliness,  in  his  case,  was  next  to  godliness. 

His  dress,  a  rough  goat-hair  garment  next  his  skin,  a  fisher's 
cloak  closely  girt  round  him.  In  his  hand  a  Crooked  Staff  of 
rough  wood,  not  gilded  and  gemmed,  says  Joceliiie,  like  the 
Crozier  of  our  later  Bishops.  When  Lent  comes,  he  redoubles 
his  severities,  withdraws  for  Forty  days  into  the  wilderness,  in 
remembrance  of  John  the  Baptist  and  our  Lord.  There  gives 
himself  wholly  to  Prayer  and  Meditation,  living  all  the  while  on 
nothing  but  the  roots  he  gathers.  Once  or  twice  only,  during 
the  Forty  days,  he  visits  his  Brethren  for  Episcopal  duties,  and 
returns  ;  his  dwelling,  all  the  while,  a  Cave.  At  the  mouth  of  it 
we  see  him  standing  and  praying  during  a  tempest ;  and  when 
the  lightning  and  whirlwind  are  over,  gazing  on  the  departing 
storm,  and  rejoicing  to  feel  once  more  the  Spring  breeze  on  his 
cheek.  Wlien  Easter  Day  dawned,  he  returned  to  his  Monastery, 
and  kept  the  Feast  with  great  joy,  Afterwards  he  feasted  cheer 
fully  with  his  Brother  Monks,  and  a  great  multitude  of  the  poor. 


4C2  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

By  this  life  of  blended  activity  and  retirement,  his  influence 
waxed  great  in  all  Strathclydc.  For  what  exact  reason  does  not 
appear,  but  in  time  the  heathen  King  of  Cumbria,  Morken,  gets 
envious  of  the  Saint.  From  whatever  cause,  the  King  calls  him 
a  Magician  and  Sorcerer,  and  bids  him  begone  out  of  his  sight. 
Kentigern  goes  to  expostulate.  Morken  loses  his  temper,  mal 
treats  the  saint,  even  kicks  him  so  hard  as  to  lay  him  flat  on  his 
back.  Keutigern  bears  it  quietly  and  withdraws.  Soon  after 
Morken  dies.  But  his  kinsmen  continue  to  persecute  Kentigern, 
till  at  last  he  flies  from  Strathclvde  to  Wales.  During  his  exile 

*>  o 

in  Wales  he  dwelt  with  S.  David  for  a  time,  and  then  rears  a 
great  Monastery  of  his  own,  wherein  he  taught  the  young  S. 
Asaph.  Joceline  makes  him,  during  this  exile,  visit  Rome  seven 
times,  and  once  see  Gregory  the  Great,  and  receive  Confirmation 
of  his  Bishopric  from  him.  Many  years  he  sojourned  in  Wales, 
and  had  already  grown  hoary  in  exile. 

At  length  there  arises  at  Stratliclyde  a  Christian  King,  of  the 
name  of  Rederech  (Roderick),  who  had  been  Baptized  in  Ire 
land.  His  first  act  is  to  invite  the  Saint  to  return  and  gather 
together  his  Sheep,  now  long  scattered  on  the  mountains. 
At  first  Kentigern  hesitates ;  would  rather  pass  his  few  remain 
ing  years  in  peace,  and  die  in  the  Welsh  Monastery  which 
he  has  built  with  so  much  toil,  and  among  the  Disciples  who 
love  him  as  their  Father  in  Christ.  But  he  has  not  been 
wont  to  follow  his  own  likings  heretofore,  neither  will  he  now, 
but  will  leave  the  whole  issue  to  God.  At  night,  while  he  is  in 
this  mind,  as  he  lay  in  his  Oratory,  an  Angel  appears  and  bids 
him  arise  and  return  to  his  own  Land  and  People.  Straightway 
he  Ordains  young  Asaph  Bishop,  takes  leave  of  all  his  Brethren, 
and  sets  his  face  to  the  North.  He  intends  to  go  all  alone,  but 
CGO  of  his  Brethren  arise  and  follow  him.  With  that  great  army 
of  Monks  he  re-enters  Stratliclyde,  and  Rederech  and  his  people 
meet  him  on  his  way  with  welcome,  and  conduct  him  to  his  old 
Monastery  with  much  rejoicing.  The  new  King,  not  content 
with  restoring,  must  needs  subject  himself  wrholly  to  the  Bishop, 
and  lay  the  Kingly  powrer  absolutely  at  his  feet.  Though  old, 
yet  the  Bishop's  activity  is  unabated.  He  renewrs  his  travels 


KENTIGEBX.  403 

through  all  the  Dales  of  Strathclyde,  confronting  Druid  Priest 
and  confounding  Druidism  ;  confronting  Saxons  and  confounding 
Woden  ;  proving  that  Woden  was  no  God,  he  told  them  "  of  the 
Triune  God,  Maker  of  all  things,  Preached  to  them  the  Faith  of 
Christ  and  the  Sacraments  of  Faith,  and  that  there  is  but  one 
Name  under  Heaven  whereby  men  are  saved."  This  he  did  in 
his  own  Diocese.  The  same  in  Galloway,  the  same  in  Albyn,  or 
the  Highlands,  at  the  risk  of  death  from  savage  Picts.  "Even 
with  this  he  was  not  content.  What  his  aged  body  could  not 
overtake,  his  spirit  still  longed  to  do.  Unable  now  to  go  him 
self,  he  sent  his  most  brave  and  zealous  Disciples  to  the  Orkneys, 
and  even,  says  Joceliue,  to  Norway,  to  do  there  what  he  had 
done  in  Strathclyde. 

At  last  overtaken  by  age,  and  unable  to  travel  more,  he 
returns  to  his  Monastery  at  Glasghu,  to  spend  there  his  last 
clays.  Then  it  was  that  his  Contemporary,  Columba,  he  too 
approaching  the  end  of  a  life  spent  in  like  labours,  came  from  his 
Island  Monastery,  all  the  way  to  visit  his  Fellow-labourer,  the 
Apostle  of  Strathclyde.  When  Mungo  heard  that  Columba  was 
approaching,  he  went  out  with  all  his  Monks  to  do  honour  to  the 
Apostle  of  lona.  They  went  forth— first  the  younger  Brethren, 
then  the  middle-aged,  then  the  old,  Kentigern  with  the  last, 
chanting  Psalms  :  "  The  way  of  the  just  hath  been  made  bright, 
the  path  of  the  holy  prepared."  The  lona  Monks  raised  their 
Antiphony :  "  The  holy  shall  go  from  strength  to  strength  ;  they 
shall  appear  before  the  God  of  gods  in  Zion."  As  they  drew 
nearer,  Columba  believed  he  saw  a  Dove  of  Fire  alight  on  Kenti- 
gern's  head,  and  his  Raiment  grew  white  as  light.  There  they 
met  by  the  green  Banks  of  the  Molendinar  Burn,  then  a  clear 
Stream,  now  a  black  and  foul  Sewer.  For  some  days  they 
stayed  together,  and  conversed  of  the  things  to  which  their  lives 
had  been  devoted,  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  men. 
Ere  they  parted  they  exchanged  Staves,  as  a  testimony  of  mutual 
love  in  Christ.  And  long  after,  even  to  the  Fifteenth  Century, 
the  Staff  which  Columba  gave  to  Kentigern  was  preserved  as 'a 
precious  Relic  in  the  Cathedral  of  S.  Wilfrid,  at  Ripon. 

While  the  two   Saints  were  thus  employed,  some  of  their 


401  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

attendants  were  more  questionably  engaged.  Very  naive  is  the 
Narrative  of  Friar  Joceline.  Some  of  the  lona  Monks  having 
little  taste  for  Spiritual  Repasts,  but  a  strong  appreciation  of 
better  fare  than  Kentigern  set  before  them,  caught  sight  of  the 
Bishop's  Flock  feeding  at  a  distance.  Off  they  go,  lay  hands  on 
the  Saint's  best  Earn,  and,  spite  of  the  Shepherd's  adjuring  them 
by  the  Holy  Trinity  and  S.  Kentigern,  drag  him  off  forcibly,  and 
cut  off  the  poor  Beast's  head.  But,  lo !  the  Ram  they  had 
intended  to  flay  and  eat,  rises  and  returns  straightway  to  the 
Flock,  leaving  his  head  in  the  hands  of  his  slaughterer.  The 
head  turns  to  Stone  in  his  grasp,  and  remains  firmly  attached  to 
his  hands.  Nothing  they  can  do  will  dissever  them.  What  is 
to  be  done  ?  One  thing  only  :  go  throw  themselves  at  Kentigern's 
feet,  and  beg  forgiveness.  The  Saint  kindly  chides  them,  gives 
them  a  little  Homily  against  Fraud,  Theft,  and  Sacrilege,  and 
releases  them,  says  Joceline,  from  the  double  bond  of  their  Sin 
and  of  the  Stone  Head  glued  to  their  hands  ! 

And  now,  when  he  could  no  longer  move  abroad,  his  earthly 
tenement,  worn  by  extreme  age  and  much  fatigue,  began  through 
its  many  chinks  to  let  in  the  light  of  the  Eternal  dawn.  Then 
he  called  his  Disciples  to  him,  gave  them  his  last  Charge, 
Blessed  them,  and  committed  them  and  his  work  to  God.  On  a 
Sunday  morning,  the  Sunday  of  the  year  on  which  he  had  been 
wont  to  Baptise  many,  he  bade  his  Disciples  bear  him  to  a  Bath, 
not  this  time  of  freezing,  but  of  tepid  water.  Laid  in  the  Bath, 
while  they  stood  around  him,  he  raised  eyes  arid  hands  to 
Heaven,  and  then  sank  into  the  gentle  last  sleep.  So  Died  the 
Apostle  of  Strathclyde.  The  survivors  laid  him  on  the  right  side 
of  the  Altar  of  his  own  wooden  Church.  To  this  place,  which 
Kentigern  had  chosen  for  his  rest,  King  Rederech  followed  him 
within  the  year,  and  here,  for  Ages,  the  Kings  and  Warriors,  the 
Saints  and  Sages  of  Cumbria,  chose  to  rest,  beside  the  Ashes  of 
the  renowned  Apostle  of  their  Nation.  It  was  about  the  year 
600  that  Kentigern  was  laid  in  his  Grave,  and  for  some  Centuries 
we  know  little  how  it  fared  with  the  Monastery,  and  the  Church, 
and  the  Religion  he  had  planted.  The  Kingdom  of  Strathclyde 
in  time  was  broken  up ;  by  the  Tenth  Century  it  had  begun  to 


KENTIGERN.  4G5 

disappear,  and  its  Territory  had  passed  under  the  Scottish 
Crown.  The  See  of  Kentigern  fell,  the  Grave  and  Shrine  were 
neglected,  and  all  that  remained  of  Kentigern  were  his  Bones,  and 
the  ancient  Cemetery  with  its  tall  Stone  Cross  and  girdle  of 
old  Trees.  In  the  Twelfth  Century  King  David  restored  this, 
with  so  many  more  of  Scotland's  holy  Places,  and  the  Work, 
begun  under  his  auspices  at  the  beginning  of  the  Century,  was 
carried  forward  by  Bishop  Joceline  at  its  close.  David  and  his 
Preceptor,  Bishop  John,  built  the  first  Cathedral  over  the  spot 
hallowed  by  Mungo's  dust. 

The  piety  of  S.  Kentigern  was  so  much  held  in  esteem,  that 
many  Churches  and  Chapels  were  dedicated  to  him  in  all  parts 
of  the  Kingdom,  particularly  in  Cumberland,  Annandale,  Culross, 
Auchterarder,  Peebles,  Pennicuik,  Lothian,  and  Strathbogie. 
The  affectionate  credulity  of  a  simple  people,  and  a  rude  age, 
ascribed  to  him  a  thousand  miracles.  One  of  the  most  memor 
able  may  be  told  in  the  following  words  : — The  Queen  of  Cadyow 
chanced,  once  on  a  time,  to  lose  a  ring  which  had  been  presented 
to  her  by  her  husband,  as  a  token  of  his  affection.  The  resent 
ment  or  jealousy  of  her  lord  was  about  to  put  her  to  death,  when, 
in  her  great  distress,  the  lady  applied  to  the  holy  man,  implor 
ing  his  interposition  for  the  recovery  of  the  King.  Shortly 
afterwards,  S.  Kentigern,  while  recreating  himself  by  a  walk  on 
the  Banks  of  the  Clyde,  as  was  his  wont  after  his  Devotions, 
desired  that  the  first  Fish  which  was  taken  from  the  Kiver  should 
be  brought  to  him.  This  was  done,  and  in  the  mouth  of  the 
Salmon  was  found  the  identical  Ring  which  had  caused  the  lady's 
disquietude,  and  was  now  the  cause  of  its  removal.  This  Legend, 
along  with  some  other  of  the  more  notable  miracles  of  S.  Kenti 
gern,  is  still  commemorated  in  the  Arms  of  the  City  of  Glasgow, 
which  show  a  Tree  with  a  Bird  perched  in  its  boughs ;  on  one 
side  a  Salmon  with  a  Ring  in  its  mouth,  and  on  the  other  a  Bell. 
The  Salmon  and  the  Piitcj  are  the  emblems  of  the  miraculous 
Love-Pledge  of  the  frail  Queen  of  Cadyow.  The  Tree  is  a  token 
of  a  miracle  which  S.  Kentigern  wrought  at  Culross,  when,  the 
Lamps  of  the  Monastery  having  been  extinguished,  he  tore  a 
frozen  bough  from  a  neighbouring  hazel,  and  making  the  sign 

VOL.  II.  3  N 


406  BISIIOrS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

of  the  Cross  over  it,  instantly  kindled  it  into  a  flame.  The  Bird 
represents  a  tame  Robin,  the  favourite  of  S.  Serf,  which,  having 
been  accidentally  killed  and  torn  to  pieces  by  his  Disciples  at 
Culross,  was  miraculously  brought  to  life  again  by  S.  Kentigern. 
The  Bell  commemorates  a  famous  Bell  which  was  brought  from 
Rome  by  S.  Kentigern,  and  was  preserved  in  Glasgow  until  the 
Reformation,  if  not,  indeed,  to  a  more  recent  period.  It  was 
called  "  S.  Mungo's  Bell,"  and  was  tolled  through  the  City  to 
warn  the  inhabitants  to  pray  for  the  soul's  repose  of  the  departed. 
All  these  appear  first  in  the  Seals  of  the  Bishops  of  Glasgow,  in 
the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Centuries,  from  which  they  were 
transferred  to  the  Common  Seal  of  the  City  in  the  beginning  of 
the  Fourteenth  Century.  [Preface  to  the  Liber  Colhrjii  Nostre 
Domine  Glasguemis,  Edited  by  Mr.  Joseph  Robertson;  also,  the 
"Missa  S.  Kentt'yerni,"  in  the  Maitlaml  Club  Miscellany,  vol.  iv., 
part  /.,  Edited  by  Mr.  Robertson.] 

Of  Ninian  there  is  no  visible  Memorial  save  that  poor  Roof 
less  Chapel  on  the  bleak  Promontory ;  of  Columba,  only  those 
forlorn  Walls,  bleaching  in  the  damp  Sea-mists  and  moist 
Atlantic  Winds ;  Kentigern  has  two  lasting  Monuments,  the 
Cathedral  built  round  his  Grave,  and  the  City  built  round  the 
Cathedral.  But  for  Kentigem  and  the  reverence  that  gathered 
round  him,  no  Cathedral  had  ever  been  there ;  and  but  for  the 
Cathedral  no  City.  The  Charters  are  still  extant  which  show  the 
process  by  which  the  City  grew  in  the  Twelfth  Century,  under 
shadow  of  the  Cathedral — here  a  Burgess  of  Haddington  taking 
a  House,  there  the  Monks  of  Melrose  taking  a  Grant  of  Land  ; 
here  a  Toft  and  a  Net's  Fishing  in  Clyde  assigned  to  the  Knights 
Templar,  there  a  Weekly  Market  fixed  for  Thursday,  and  "the 
King's  Peace"  obtained  by  the  Bishop  for  the  Burgesses,  and  his 
protection  for  their  Chattels.  And  yet,  though  the  Saint  is 
HistorieaUij  the  cause  of  Glasgow,  and  all  the  Commerce  that  now 
rolls  through  that  mighty  Mart,  we  little  expect  to  find  the 
Kentigern  of  the  Sixth  Century  develop  into  the  Glasgow 
Merchant  of  the  Nineteenth. 

But  no  incongruity  arises  between  the  associations  of  the 
Cathedral  and  the  Cell  of  the  Saint.     The  one  is  the  natural 


KENTIGEEX.  467 

outcome  of  the  other.  As  we  stand  amid  the  venerable  gloom  of 
that  dim  Crypt,  or  wander  through  massive  Pier  and  Pillar, 
Arch  and  Arcade,  we  see  how  one  golden  thread  runs  through 
and  knits  together  Ages  wide  apart  and  Characters  opposed, 
teaching  us  that  fairness  and  charity  are  the  most  precious  fruits 
which  a  clear  survey  of  Church  History  yields.  If  anything  could 
make  us  unlearn  small  Sectarianisms,  and  make  us  wish  for  the 
One  Faith,  it  would  be  the  study  of  those  old  Christian  Ages— 
not  certainly  "  dark" — and  the  close  contemplation  of  those  early 
Christian  Heroes,  men  in  all  externals  so  unlike  ourselves ;  in 
mode  of  life,  in  all  that  makes  up  outward  civilisation,  household 
comfort,  social  well-being,  doubtless  so  far  our  inferiors ;  but  in 
soul,  in  strength  of  Faith,  in  devotion  to  the  highest  of  ends, 
by  most  modern  Christians  unapproached.  [Good  Words,  I860.] 

S.  Kentigcrn  is  said  to  have  been  succeeded  by  S.  Baldred, 
but  as  to  how  long  he  lived,  or  who  were  his  Successors,  no 
account  can  be  given.  For  the  long  period  of  nearly  500  years 
a  veil  of  almost  impenetrable  obscurity  hangs  over  the  See. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  sanctity  pertaining  to  the  resting- 
place  of  the  bones  of  so  holy  a  man  as  S.  Kentigern,  kept  the 
Establishment  together,  and  drew  around  it  the  Village  which 
became  the  nucleus  of  the  future  City.  There  is  little  doubt 
that  the  small  community  suffered  from  the  incursions  of  the 
Danes  from  beyond  the  seas,  as  well  as  from  the  semi-bar 
barian  Tribes  at  home,  upon  whom  the  mantle  of  Christianity 
was  as  yet  very  loosely  adjusted.  In  the  brief  phrase  of  M'Ure, 
the  earliest  Historian  of  Glasgow- — "After  S.  Mungo,  for  many 
ages,  the  Episcopal  Sec  was  overrun  with  Heathenism  and  Bar 
barity,  till  the  Reign  of  Alexander  I." 

Mr.  M'Lelland,  in  his  able  and  ingenious  "Essay  on  the 
Cathedral  Church  of  Glasgow,"  gives  the  following  note:— 
"  There  is,  with  this  total  eclipse  of  our  own  See,  a  singular 
coincidence  in  the  History  of  that  of  Lichfield,  of  which,  from 
the  year  700,  ending  with  the  Episcopate  of  Bishop  Hedda,  there 
is  no  record  until  we  find  it  revived,  under  the  Presidence  of 
Roger  de  Clinton,  in  1128,  leaving  a  blank  of  428  years,  in 
precisely  the  same  Era  as  our  own." 


168  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

II.  JOHN  ACHAIUS,     A.D.  1115-47, 

A  person  of  good  learning  and  great  probity,  and  who  had 
travelled  both  into  France  and  Italy  for  his  improvement,  and 
had  the  charge  of  the  education  of  David  (the  brother  of  King 
Alexander  I.),  was,  by  the  favour  of  this  Prince  David,  made 
Bishop  of  this  See,  and  Consecrated  by  the  hand  of  Pope 
Paschal  II.,  A.D.  1115.  Achaius  meeting  with  much  opposition 
in  the  exercise  of  his  function,  as  probably  might  be  expected  in 
this  new  settlement,  threw  up,  or  at  least  deserted,  his  Office  for 
a  season,  and  made  a  journey  into  the  Holy  Land ;  others  say 
only  into  France,  where  he  became  a  Monk  of  Tyron,  and 
remained  there  until  Pope  Calixtus  II.  obliged  him  to  return  to 
his  function,  A.D.  1123.  [Cart.  Melr.\ 

The  Diocese  of  Glasgow,  extending  over  the  old  Principality 
of  Cumbria,  stretched  Southwards  into  England  as  far  as  Rere- 
cross-on-Stanmore,  until  1132,  when  Henry  I.  erected  Carlisle 
into  a  Bishop's  See,  with  Cumberland  and  Westmoreland  for  its 
Diocese.  Cumberland  was  thus  withdrawn  from  the  See  of 
Glasgow,  and  made  part  of  the  new  Diocese  of  Carlisle,  which 
loss  of  Territory,  it  seems,  was  one  of  the  causes  of  Bishop 
John's  flight  from  Glasgow,  and  which  detriment  was  hotly 
resented  by  the  King  of  the  Scots.  But  the  Papal  Legate 
appeased  his  anger,  and  prevailed  upon  him  to  allow  the  new 
Bishop  to  return  to  Carlisle.  [Statuta  Ecdesice  Scoticance,  Preface, 
p.  xxviii.] 

This  Bishop  is  called  Michael  by  Stubbs,  in  his  Actus  Pont. 
Ebor.  apud  Tiri/sden.  Col.  1713  ;  who  also  pretends  to  quote 
from  a  Document  composed  in  the  handwriting  of  that  Prelate. 
It  is  certain,  however,  that  Stubbs  is  inaccurate  in  this  particular. 

Bishop  John  was  Tutor  to  King  David.  He  had  a  long 
contest  with  Thurstin,  Archbishop  of  York,  by  whom  he  was  put 
under  Sentence  of  Suspension  in  1122.  In  1125  he  went  to 
Rome  to  try  to  get  the  Pallium  for  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews 
against  the  influence  of  the  Archbishop  of  York. 

When  Earl  David  came  to  the  Crown,  by  the  name  of  David 
I.  or  S.  David  afterwards,  he  bestowed  many  Donations  both  on 


JOHN  ACHAIUS.  .109 

the  See  and  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  and  likewise  put  the  Bishop 
into  the  Office  of  Chancellor.  [Cart.  Dunfcrm.1  But  a  secular 
employment  not  suiting,  it  seems,  the  temper  of  the  good  man, 
he  resigned  that  honourable  Office,  and  gave  himself  entirely  to 
the  duties  of  his  Ecclesiastic  function.  He  rebuilt,  probably 
before  1124,  and  adorned  the  Cathedral  Church,  and  solemnly 
Consecrated  it  Nonis  Julii  (7th  July),  A.D.  1136  \Chron.  Stae 
Crucis  et  Mclros],  at  which  Solemnity  the  King  was  present,  and 
gave  to  it  the  Lands  of  Partick.  [Cart.  Glasg.] 

On  the  occasion  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Church,  the  King, 
David  I.,  gave  to  the  Church  the  Land  of  Perdeyc  [Partick], 
which  was  soon  afterwards  erected,  along  with  the  Church  of 
Guvan  [Go van :,  into  a  Prebend  of  the  Cathedral.  In  addition  to 
the  long  List  of  Possessions  restored  to  Glasgow  upon  the  verdict 
of  the  Assize  of  Inquest,  this  saintly  King  granted  to  the  Bishop 
the  Church  of  Renfrew ;  Govan,  with  its  Church ;  the  Church 
of  Cadihou  [Cadzow] ;  the  Tithe  of  his  Cane,  or  Duties  paid  in 
Cattle  and  Swine  throughout  Strathgrif,  Cuningham,  Kyle,  and 
Carrick,  and  the  Eighth  Penny  of  all  Pleas  of  Court  throughout 
Cumbria.  The  Bishop  also  acquired  the  Church  of  Lochorwort, 
now  Borthwick,  in  Lothian,  from  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews — 
the  King  and  Prince  present  and  consenting."  [Preface  to  Regis- 
tnim  Episcopatus  Glasguensis,  Edited  by  Cosmo  Innes,  Esq.] 

A  Country  Residence,  or  "  Castle,"  was  erected  by  subsequent 
Bishops  at  Partick  on  the  West  Bank  of  the  Kelvin,  within  a  few 
yards  of  its  junction  with  the  Clyde.  An  old  Baronial. Mansion, 
said  to  have  been  built  about  1611  by  Archbishop  Spottiswoode, 
was  inhabited  by  George  Hutchison  of  Lambhill,  one  of  the 
brothers  who  Founded  Hutchison's  Hospital. 

The  Cathedral  Church,  built  by  Bishop  John,  must  have  been 
an  unpretending  structure,  mostly  of  wood,  which  was  destroyed 
by  a  fire  about  40  years  after  it  had  been  Consecrated.  It  was 
probably  of  the  Norman  Style  of  Architecture. 

His  erection  seems  to  have  been  confined  to  the  Nave  of  the 
Cathedral,  and  perhaps  a  portion  of  the  present  Transepts  may 
have  been  his  work.  The  design  of  these  parts  is  marked  by 
great  simplicity,  and  the  workmanship  is  inferior  to  that  of  the 


170  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Choir,  Lady  Chapel,  and  Chapter  House.  If  Achaius  built  a 
Choir  at  all,  it  must  have  been  taken  down,  and  its  place  supplied 
by  the  present  one,  erected  half  a  Century  subsequent.  [Arch. 
M'Lelland's  Essay  on  the  Cathedral.] 

This  Prelate  divided  the  Diocese  into  the  two  Archdeaconries 
of  Glasgow  and  Teviotdale  [Clirou.  Metros],  and  set  up  the  Offices 
of  Dean,  Sub-Dean,  Chancellor,  Treasurer,  Sacrist,  Chantor,  and 
Succentor,  and  settled  a  Prebend  upon  each  of  them  out  of  the 
Donatives  he  had  received  from  the  King.  John  is  Bishop  here 
in  the  time  of  King  David  I.  [Chart.  Glasg.,  it.  Diplom.  ct 
Nnmism.,  it.  Cart.  Diinjcnn.}  He  is  Witness  to  a  Charter  of  S. 
David  to  the  Monastery  of  Newbottle,  A.D.  1140  [August.  Hay] ; 
and  in  a  Charter  by  Robert,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  John,  Bishop 
here,  is  a  Co-Witness  with  King  David,  his  son  Henry,  and 
Matilda  the  Queen.  [Cart.  Kch.]  He  Died  the  28th  May, 
1147,  after  he  had  held  the  See  32  years  [Chron.  Mdr.  et  Stae 
Crucis],  and  was  Buried  at  Jedburgh. 

Dempster  says  that  he  wrote  two  Books,  viz.,  "  De  Soli- 
tudiuis  Encomio,"  and  "  De  Amicitia  Spiritual!."  [Keith.] 

III.  HERBERT,     A.D.  1147-64, 

Was  third  Abbot  of  Selkirk  and  first  of  Kelso,  as  is  men 
tioned  in  the  Charter  of  Translation  of  that  Abbacy  from  Selkirk 
to  Kelso,  by  Earl  David,  who  afterwards  succeeded  his  brother, 
Alexander  I.,  in  the  Kingdom  of  Scotland,  A.D.  1124.  [Ch. 
Cakho.]  Herbert  was  Chancellor  of  the  Kingdom,  and  was 
Consecrated  Bishop  of  Glasgow  on  S.  Bartholomew's  Day  the 
same  year,  1147,  by -Pope  Eugenius  III.,  at  Auxerre.  Herbert, 
Elect  of  Glasgow,  is  contemporary  with  Robert  and  Gregory, 
Bishops  of  St.  Andrews  and  Dunkeld.  [Cart.  C ambush.]  He  is 
Bishop  in  the  time  of  King  David.  [Cart.  Duiiferm. ;  it.  Nicolson's 
Historical  Library;  it.  Dipt,  et  Num.,  c.  23.]  He  is  Bishop  in  the 
time  of  Ernald,  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  and  in  the  Reign  of  King 
Malcolm.  .[Cart.  Glasg.,  Dunform.,  et  C  ambush.;  Cart.  Kelso;  it. 
Dipl.  ct  Numis.,  c.  25 ;  it.  Cart,  of  the  Hospital  of  Soltre  of  the 
Lands  of  Brotherstanes  (1153) — -Hid- Lothian  Charters,  Bannatyne 


INGELEAM.  471 

Club.]  He  introduced  into  his  Diocese  the  Usages  of  Sarum, 
which  continued  till  the  "  Reformation."  He  Died  Bishop  A.D. 
1164.  [Char.  Melr.]  In  his  time  sentence  was  given  against 
Roger,  Bishop  of  York,  and  the  Church  of  Scotland  declared  to 
he  exempt  from  all  Jurisdiction  except  that  of  the  See  of  Rome. 

IV.  INGELEAM,     A.D.  1164-74, 

Called  hy  some  "  Newbigging,"  brother  to  Elias,  Laird  of 
Dunsire,  in  the  Shire  of  Lanark,  was  the  next  who  filled  this 
See  [Cart.  Kdso] ;  but  whether  "Newbigging"  was  at  that  time 
the  surname  of  the  Lands  of  Dunsire,  is  altogether  uncertain. 
He  had  been  Rector  of  Peebles,  and  of  consequence  Archdeacon 
of  the  Church  of  Glasgow.  [EcUquicc  Sti  Kentigerni.]  While  in 
this  station  he  was  made  Chancellor  of  Scotland  by  King  David 
[Charter  to  the  See  of  St.  Andrews,  1151],  and  continued  in  the 
same  Office  by  King  Malcolm.  Roger,  Archbishop  of  York, 
having,  in  1150,  revived  his  claim  of  Superiority  over  the  Church 
in  Scotland  [Spottiswoode,  Collier,  and  Extract,  e  Chronic.  Scot.], 
and  called  a  Provincial  Council  to  meet  at  Norham  in  Northum 
berland,  thither  did  Ingelram,  the  Archdeacon,  repair ;  and  both 
there,  and  afterwards  at  Rome,  defended  so  strenuously  the  cause 
of  the  Scottish  Church,  that  he  was,  immediately  upon  the  death 
of  Herbert,  Elected  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  and  was  Consecrated  at 
Sienna  by  Pope  Alexander  III.  on  SS.  Simon's  and  Jude's  Day, 
the  very  same  year  his  Predecessor  had  Died  [Chron.  Melr.],  i.e., 
A.D.  1164.  He  was  Bishop  in  the.  time  of  King  Malcolm  [Cart. 
Kels.],  and  A.D.  1170  [Cart.  Glasg.]  He  Died  on  the  2d  of 
February,  1174.  [Chron.  Melr.]  And  Dempster  tells  us  of  three 
Books  which  were  written  by  him,  viz.,  1,  "  Epistolse  ad  diver- 
sos;"  2,  "In  Evangelia  Dominicalia ; "  3,  "  Rationes  Regni 
Administrandi." 

I  reckon  the  curious  will  not  be  in  any  way  displeased  if  I 
should  set  down  here  a  Copy  of  the  Pope's  Bull,  relating  to  his 
Holiness'  decision  of  the  Controversy,  and  his  Consecrating  of 
this  Bishop.  I  have  taken  it  verbatim  from  the  Cartulary  of 
Glasgow. 


472 


BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 


Alexander  episcopus,  servus  ser- 
vorum  Dei,  clilectis  filiis  Salomon! 
decano,  et  canonicis  Glasguen.  ct 
universo  clero  ac  populo  per  Glas- 
guensem  episcopatuin  constitutis, 
salutem  et  Apostolicam  Benedictio- 
iiem.  Venerabilem  fratrem  nostrum 
Engel.  olim  elcctum,  nunc  vero 
episcopum  vestrum,  cum  cbariss.  in 
Christo  filii  nostril  M.  illustris 
Scotorum  Regis,  et  vestris  aliorum- 
que  literis  ad  nos  venientem,  debita 
benignitate  suscepimus,  et,  sicut  nos 
et  ipsum  decuit,  hoiiorare  curavi- 
mus  :  licet  autem  nuncii  vcnerabilis 
fratris  nostri  Eboracensis  Archiepis- 
copi,  qui  praeseutes  extiterant,  re- 
pugnareut,  et  apud  nos  precibus 
multis  institerent,  ne  in  hoc  facto 
procedercmus :  nos  tamen  atten- 
dentes  illam  necessitatem,  quae 
Glasguensi  ccclesiae,  per  defectum 
pastoris,  spiritualiter  et  temporaliter 
imminebat ;  non  propterea  dimisi- 
mus,  quin  eidcin  regi,  tanquam 
Cbristianissimo  principi  volentes 
deferre,  ct  eidem  ecclesiae  vestrae 
utiliter  providere,  de  comniuni  fra- 
trum  nostrorum  concilio,  eum,  sicut 
debuimus,  in  episcopum  consecre- 
mus.  Ipsum  itaque  de  nostris,  tan 
quam  dc  Beati  Petri  manibus 
consecratum,  cum  plenitudine  gra- 
tiae  et  benedictione  Apostolicae 
sedis  ad  vos,  tanquam  ad  spirituales 
filios,  remittentes,  eum  universitati 
vestrae  attentius  commendamus  per 
Apostolica  scripta ;  rogantes,  mo- 
nentes  atque  mandantcs,  quatenus 
pro  reverentia  Beati  Petri,  ac  nostra, 
ipsum,  velut  episcopum  et  pastorem 
vestrum,  benigue  recipiatis,  et  ei, 
sicut  spiritual!  patri  et  rectori  ani- 
marum  vestrarum,debitam  in  omni 
bus  obedientiam  ac  reverentiam 
impendatis.  Si  quis  autem  vestrum 
liuic  mandato  nostro  contumaciter 
duxerit  resistendum,  nos  sententiam, 
quam  idem  episcopus  in  eum  prop- 
ter  hoc  canonice  tulerit,  auctore 
Domino,  ratam  et  firmam  habe- 


Alexander,  Bishop,  Servant  of 
Servants  of  God,  to  his  beloved 
sons,  Salmon  the  Dean,  and  to  the 
Canons  of  Glasgow,  and  to  all  the 
Clergy  and  people  constituted  by 
the  Episcopate  of  Glasgow,  Health 
and  Apostolic  Benediction.  Our 
venerable  Brother  Engelram,  for 
merly  Elected,  and  now  your  Bishop, 
coming  unto  us  with  the  Letters  of 
our  most  beloved  son  in  Christ,  M., 
the  illustrious  King  of  the  Scots, 
and  witli  your  Letters  and  those  of 
others,  we  have  received  with  due 
benevolence,  and  caused  him  to  be 
honoured  as  became  both  him  and 
us.  Moreover,  though  the  Messen 
gers  of  our  venerable  Brother  the 
Archbishop  of  York,  who  were  upon 
the  spot,  opposed  and  insisted  upon 
us  with  much  entreaty  that  we 
should  not  proceed  in  this  measure, 
we,  however,  taking  into  our  con 
sideration  that  necessity  which 
spiritually  and  temporally  threat 
ened  the  Church  of  Glasgow  through 
the  want  of  a  Pastor :  therefore  we 
did  not  dismiss  the  case  without 
Consecrating  him  as  your  Bishop, 
as  in  duty  bound,  with  the  common 
consent  of  our  Brethren,  willing  to 
gratify  the  same  King  as  a  most 
Christian  Prince,  and  to  provide 
usefully  for  the  same  Church. 
Wherefore,  sending  him  back  to  you, 
as  to  our  spiritual  sons,  Consecrated 
by  our  hands,  as  by  the  hands  of 
S.  Peter,  with  plenitude  of  grace 
and  Benediction  of  the  Apostolic 
See,  we  commend  him  with  more 
than  ordinary  care  by  our  Apostolic 
Writs  to  your  whole  Diocese,  beg 
ging,  advising,  and  commanding 
that  you  receive  him  kindly,  in  con 
sideration  of  your  reverence  for  S. 
Peter,  and  as  your  Bishop  and 
Pastor,  and  that  you  yield  him,  as 
your  Spiritual  Father  and  the  direc 
tor  of  your  soul  in  all  things,  due 
obedience  and  reverence.  But,  if 
any  one  of  you  should  take  it  into 


JOCELINE. 


473 


bimus. — Datura  Senonib.  Kal.  No- 
vembris. 


your  head  to  resist  this  our  Man 
date,  we,  with  the  Lord's  authority, 
shall  hold  ratified  and  fixed  such 
sentence  as  the  said  Bishop  shall 
have  passed  upon  him  Canonically. 
&c. 


V.  JOCELINE,     A.D.  1175-99, 

Abbot  of  the  Cistertian  Monastery  of  Melrose,  was  Elected 
the  same  year  that  Ingelram  Died, 
viz.,  A.D.  1174,  and  was  Conse 
crated  by  Eskilus,  or  Esciline, 
Archbishop  of  Lunden,  in  the  Pro 
vince  of  Holstein,  Denmark  (the 
Pope's  Legate  for  that  Kingdom), 
on  the  1st  June,  1175,  in  Chara- 
valle,  Clairvaux.  [Chron.  Melr.] 
He  would  appear  to  have  been 
Archdeacon  of  Dunkeld  before  he 
came  to  be  Abbot  of  Melrose ;  at 
least,  one  Joceline,  Archdeacon 
there,  is  Witness  to  "  Hugo  Dei 
gratia  hnmilis  minister  Sti  An- 
dreae."  [Curt.  Camliisk.]  But 
when  I  see  Joceline,  Archdeacon 
of  Dunkeld,  a  Witness  to  King 
William,  and  in  the  same  Writ 
Joceline,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  set 
down  as  the  first  Witness  [Cart. 
Mor.],  I  easily  conclude  they  must 
have  been  two  different  persons. 
That  Bishop  Joceline  was  the 
immediate  Successor  of  Ingelram, 
is  evident  from  a  Bull  of  Pope 
Alexander  III., — "  Venerabili  fra- 
tri  Jocelino  Glasguensi  episcopo, 

ejusque       successoribus. Dat 

Ferentin.     2    Kal.    Maii,    Incar- 


On  the  Seal  is  a  figure  of  a  Bishop 
vested,  his  right  hand  elevated  bestow 
ing  Benediction,  his  left  holding  a 
Crozier. 

The  Counter  Seal  represents  two 
Doves  drinking  from  a  Vase.  In 
scription  illegible.  Cir.  A.D.  1190. 
[Metros  Charters.] 


VOL.  n. 


So 


474  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

nationis  Dominicae,  anno  1174.  Pontificatus  Domini  Alexandri 
Papae  III.  anno  ejus  16."  [Cart.  Glasg.]  And  King  William 
grants  a  Charter  appointing  Tithes  to  be  paid  to  Joceline,  "  sicut 
unquam  melius  aut  pleriius  Joanni  et  Herberto,  aut  Engelramo, 
episcopis  ante  eum  solvere  solebatis."  [Ibid.]  This  Bishop 
enlarged  the  Cathedral,  and  rebuilt  it  after  being  burned  down  in 
the  time  of  Bishop  John,  Re-dedicating  it  "pridie  Nonas  Julii 
[4th  July]  anno  1197,"  on  the  Octave  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul,  in 
the  24th  year  of  his  Episcopate.  \Clirou.  Melr.]  The  Crypt  was 
entirely  built  and  completed  by  him ;  and  although  the  Choir, 
Lady  Chapel,  and  Central  Tower  were  commenced  by  him,  he 
lived  but  to  see  the  latter  raised  so  far  as  the  base  of  the  Spire, 
his  labours  occupying  22  years.  He  gave  to  the  Monks  of  Mel- 
rose  the  Mensal  Church  of  Hastendan  Hassinden  in  pure  and 
perpetual  Alms.  [Chron.  Melr.}  Joceline  is  Bishop  of  Glasgow 
in  the  time  of  King  William  [Cart.  Duufcrm.  ,  in  the  fifth  year  of 
his  Reign  [Cart.  Aberdon.]  He  is  contemporary  with  Richard, 
Bishop  of  Moray  [Errol],  and  with  Hugo  and  Roger,  Bishops  of 
St.  Andrews  [Cart.  Aberbr.]  J.  is  Bishop  A.D.  1177  \Cart. 
Kels.],  and  Joceline  A.D.  1170  '-.Cart.  Arbr.],  and  A.D.  1181,  when 
he  laid  the  Foundation  of  the  present  Cathedral  [Mdros.}  In 
1180,  Bishop  Joceline  gave  to  the  Monks  of  Kelso  all  their 
Churches  within  his  Diocese,  including  those  of  Selkirk  and  the 
Parsonage  of  the  same.  [Lib.  de  Cakhou,  pp.  318,  319.]  About 
1180,  King  William  conveys  by  Charter  to  Bishop  Jocelin,  one 
"  Gilmachoi  de  Conglud,  with  his  children  and  all  his  descend 
ants."  The  Chronicle  of  Melrose  records  that  the  Church  of  S. 
Andrew  the  Apostle  at  Peebles  was  Dedicated  to  Jocelin,  on 
Sunday  the  29th  October,  1195.  In  the  Cartulary  of  Paisley, 
Bishop  Joceline  is  a  frequent  Witness ;  and  he  gives  or  confirms 
to  that  Monastery  several  Churches,  such  as  Mernis  [Newton 
Mearnsl,  Katkert  [Cathcart],  Ruglen  [Rutherglen],  &c. 

The  title  of  Bishop  Ingelram  to  the  Church  of  Charnewid 
[Carnwath]  was  confirmed  by  Pope  Alexander  III.  in  1170.  [Beg. 
Glas.,  xxii.,  24. J  Similar  Confirmations  were  granted  to  Ingel- 
ram's  Successor,  Bishop  Joceline,  by  the  same  Pontiff  in  1174 
and  1178,  and  also  by  Lucius  III.  in  1181.  [Ibid,  xxx.,  32  ;  .r //?'., 


HUGO  DE  HOXBURGH.  475 

51 ;  .dix.,  57.  i  Shortly  after  this  latter  Date,  William  cle  Suiner- 
villa  granted  another  Charter,  confirming  his  former  Grant,  and 
endowing  the  Church  with  a  half  Ploughgate  of  Land,  and  a  full 
Toft  and  Croft  belonging  to  the  same,  with  a  right  of  Common 
Pasturage,  and  all  other  Easements  and  Pertinents.  Cum 
dimidia  carucata  terre  et  cum  plenario  tofto  et  crofto,  ad  dimidi- 
am  carucatam  terre  pertinente  et  cum  communi  pastura  et  omni 
bus  aliis  asimentis  et  pertinentibus.  [Ibid,  xlc.,  52.]  Bishop 
Joceline  largely  increased  the  number  of  Prebends  and  Canons 
in  the  Cathedral  of  Glasgow,  and  devoted  the  Revenues  of  the 
Church  of  Carnwath  to  the  support  of  one  of  these  Foundations. 
This  arrangement  was  confirmed  by  Pope  Urban  III.  in  1186. 
His  Apostolic  Letter  was  Dated  at  Verona,  and  the  part  of  it 
relating  to  the  Church  of  Carnwath  is  in  the  following  terms  :— 
"We  understand  from  your  representation,  that  when  a  noble 
man,  W.  de  Sumervilla,  had  granted  the  Church  of  Carnewith  to 
your  Cathedral,  thou,  Brother  Bishop,  in  increasing  the  number 
of  the  Prebends  and  Canons,  have  assigned  this  Church  for  ever 
to  one  of  these  Prebends.  Therefore,  that  this  Deed  of  yours 
and  the  aforesaid  William  should  be  strengthened  by  the  authority 
of  the  Holy  See ;  because  also  it  is  alleged  that  the  said  Church 
was  constructed  within  the  bounds  of  the  Parish  of  Libertun,  and 
that  the  right  of  Patronage  of  this  Church  of  Libertun  is  said  to 
have  afterwards  passed  to  another  person ;  lest  by  occasion  of 
this  you  and  your  Church  might  afterwards  suffer  prejudice — we, 
after  the  example  of  our  Predecessor,  Pope  Lucius,  confirm  the 
said  Church  of  Carnewith  to  you,  and,  through  you,  to  the 
Church  of  Glasgow.  If  any  one  attempt  to  infringe  this  Confir 
mation,  let  them  know  that  they  will  incur  the  indignation  of 
God  and  of  the  blessed  Peter  and  Paul,  His  Apostles."  [Irving' s 
Upper  Ward  of  Lanarkshire.] 

Bishop  Joceline  Died  at  Melrose  at  his  old  Abbey,  A.D.  1199. 
' Chron.  Mdr.}     He  was  Buried  on  the  North  side  of  the  Choir. 

VI.  HUGO  DE  ROXBURGH.     A.D.  1199. 
After  Bishop  Joceline,   one  Hew,   or  Hugo  de   Roxburgh, 


476  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

descended  of  a  good  Family  of  that  Surname,  was  Promoted  to 
this  See.  He  was  Hector  of  Tullibody  in  the  Shire  of  Clack 
mannan,  and  Clerk  to  Nicolaus,  the  Chancellor  of  Scotland,  who 
Died  A.D.  1171.  'Cart.  Cambuskenneih,  fol.  r.  163. ]  He  was 
afterwards  one  of  the  Clerici  Regis  [Dalnjmple,  p.  272',  and  Arch 
deacon  of  St.  Andrews.  In  1189  he  was  made  Chancellor  of 
Scotland,  and  Preferred  to  this  See  ten  years  thereafter.  But 
before  he  had  sat  therein  one  full  year,  death  took  him  away, 
"  sexto  Idus  Julii  1190.''  [Citron.  Melr.i  "Hugo  cancellarius 
ScotitB  successit  Joceline  episcopo  Glasguensi,  et  cito  moritur." 
[Fordun.1'  He  Died  two  months  after  his  Election  to  the  See, 
probably  Unconsecrated.  \Pn\f.  Ite<j.  Ep.  Glas.,  p.  xxi\] 

VII.  WILLIAM  MALVOISINE.     A.D.  1200. 

William  Malvicine,  al.  Malvoisine  (called  in  the  Charters  DC 
Malovicino),  Chancellor  of  the  Kingdom,  was  Elected  on  9th 
December,  and  was  Consecrated  Bishop  of  this  See  in  1200. 
[Chron.  Mclr.]  He  was  Elected  in  October,  1199.  [Chron. 
Melr.]  Both  accounts  may  be  true,  through  the  different  com 
putation  of  the  beginning  of  the  year.  He  was  Bishop  here  A.D. 
1200.  He  was  Consecrated  in  France  by  the  Archbishop  of 
Lyons.  [Keith.] — For  more  of  Bishop  Malvoisine,  see  Scoti- 
chronicon,  vol.  i.,  p.  146. 

VIII.  FLORENCE.     Elect.     A.D.  1202. 

Florentius,  a  son  of  the  Earl  of  Holland,  and,  by  the  mother,  a  relation 
of  the  King  of  Scotland,  had  applied  himself  to  the  service  of  the  Church, 
and  was  Preferred  by  our  King  William  to  be  Lord  Chancellor  of  this  King 
dom  in  1208.  [Chron.  Aberbr.]  Florence  was  son  of  the  gallant  Count 
Florence  of  Holland,  the  hero  of  the  Crusaders  at  Damietta,  by  Ada,  the 
grand-daughter  of  David  I.  of  Scotland.  His  uncle,  King  William,  made  him 
his  Chancellor.  He  continued  for  five  years  without  Consecration,  and 
Resigned  his  Charge  in  1207.  The  causes  of  his  not  being  Confirmed,  and 
of  his  Resignation,  are  equally  unknown.  [Pref.  Rcy.  Epis.  Glas.,  xxv.] 
Upon  Bishop  Malvicine's  Translation  to  the  See  of  St.  Andrews,  he  was 
Elected  Bishop  of  Glasgow.  Immediately  thereafter,  he,  upon  "  consilium 
et  assensum  capituli  Glasguensis  et  cleri  dioceseos,"  Confirmed  "  Clero  et 
ecclesia?  Stfe  Marise  de  Melros,  ecclesiam  de  Hasteudan ;"  and,  moreover, 


WALTER. 


477 


obliges  himself  that  he  shall  Ratify  and  Confirm  it  de  noro  as  soon  as  ho 
shall  be  Consecrated.  [Cart.  Melr.]  But  whatever 
impediment  might  have  delayed  his  Consecration, 
it  is  certain  that,  while  he  was  only  Elect  of  this 
See  in  1202,  he,  with  the  Pope's  allowance, 
Resigned  his  Episcopal  function  in  1207,  and 
thereafter  went  to  Rome  in  1211,  where  he  ended 
his  days  the  year  following.  [ll>id.]  In  a  Bull  of 
Confirmation  to  the  Abbey  of  Paisley  by  Pope 
Innocent  III.,  of  the  Churches  of  Turnberry, 
Craigiu,  and  Dalziel,  mention  is  made  of  "  Flo- 
rentius  electus  Glasg.,"  and  "  Florentius  Dei 
gratia  Glasguensis  electus,  Domini  regis  cancel- 
larius,  omnibus  homiuibus,  amicis  suis,"  but  has 
no  Date ;  and  so  it  only  serves  to  ascertain  that 
one  Florentius  was  really  Bishop-Elect  of  Glas 
gow.  [Curt.  Glaxy.] 


IX.  WALTER,     A.D.  1208-32, 

Chaplain  to  King  William,  was  Elected 
into  this  See  on  the  5th  of  the  Ides  of 
December,  1207,  the  same  year  in  which  A  young  man  seated  before 

•"  a   Lectern,  on   which  is   a 

the  former  Elect  had  Resigned,  and  was  Book ;  in  his  left  hand  he 
Consecrated  by  Papal  License  at  Glasgow  llolds  a  Rod  cr  Staff  of 

ii        ct     -i      r  -\-r  -i  r-i/r  T    -      TI    Oflicc ;  hi s  right  hand  raised 

the  2nd  of  November,  1208.  [Melr.±  It  a  litfle>  aml°thc  forefingor 
appears  by  the  Chartulary  of  Glasgow  that  extended  as  if  he  was  dis- 
Walter  succeeded  to  Florence,  and  that  courses  from  the  Book. 

Florence    had    never    been    Consecrated.  ..  °? the  C(rter  Seal  are 

the  figures  of  two  persons  in 

[Charta  Willidmi  f.  Galfridi  Domini  de  a  semi-nude  state,  dr.  UOL 
Orde  de  term  de  Staphope.]  This  Bishop  [Metros  Charters] 
was  sent  to  treat  about  peace  with  John,  King  of  England, 
and  went  to  a  General  Council  (the  Lateran)  at  Rome  in 
1215,  together  with  Brice,  Bishop  of  Moray,  and  Adam,  Bishop 
of  Caithness,  and  returned  the  third  year  after,  when  they 
obtained  the  Papal  Absolution  from  the  Interdict  of  the  Legate 
Gualo.  [Melr.]  He  was  Bishop  here  in  1212  [Cart.  Dunferm.], 
as  he  seems  to  have  been  in  the  third  year  of  Pope  Honorius, 
i.e.,  1218;  and  1220.  [Cart.  Paslet.]  He  is  Witness  to  a  Charter 
of  Walter,  second  Steward  of  Scotland,  granting  to  the  Monks  of 


BISHOPS  OF  THE  (SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 


Paisley  free  liberty  to  Elect  a  Prior  and  Abbot  to  themselves, 
about  1210  or  1220.  .Hay.}  He  was  Bishop  in  1225,  and  in 

the  twelfth  year  of  King  Alexander 
II.  [Cart.  Glusy.  ct  3Ior.]t  and  also  in 
1227.  [Melt:}  He  was  Contempo 
rary  with  William  Malvicine,  Bishop 
of  St.  Andrews.  [Ibid  ct  Cart.  Pasl.\ 
He  is  mentioned  in  a  Charter  of  Con 
firmation  of  the  Church  of  Ord, 
1231-2  \licy.  Hospital  of  Soltrc],  and 
was  still  Bishop  in  1232  [Kelso],  and 
Died  in  that  year.  \Cliron.  Melros.} 
During  Walter's  Episcopate,  the 
Families  of  Carrick  and  of  Lennox, 
from  whose  wild  Dominions  it  was,  in 
the  last  Eeign,  so  difficult  to  obtain 
the  Dues  of  the  Church,  had  now 
become  its  dutiful  children.  In  1225, 
Earl  Duncan  of  Carrick,  in  a  Chapter 
held  at  Ayr,  solemnly  undertook  to 
pay  all  his  Tithes  and  Dues,  and  to 
use  his  power  with  his  men  and 
Tenants  for  the  same  purpose.  He 
promised  no  longer  to  oppress  the 
Clergy  of  Carrick  with  Tallies  or 
Exactions,  to  enforce  Church  Cen 
sures  by  Confiscation  and  Temporal 
Penalties,  and  he  granted  that  the 
Clergy  should  have  a  right  of  Pastur 
age  through  his  whole  Land,  "  ac- 

On  the  heal  is  the  figure  of  a       3  •     .  ' 

Bishop  in  profile,  standing  upon  a   cording    to    the    iraditions   of    the 

Crescent  reversed,  Ms  right  hand  Fathers  and  the  Statutes  of  the 
elevated,  and  his  left  holding  the  Churcli;"  and  the  Earl>g  g(m  CQm. 
Crozier. 

On  the  Counter  Seal  is  a  demi-  pounded  for  injuries  he  had  perpe- 
figure  of  a  Bishop  as  in  the  former,  trated  against  the  Glasgow  Churches 
A.D.  1227.  [Metros  Charters.]  during  the  War  in  Galloway,  by  a 

Donation  of  a  Church — which  seems  to  be  that  of  Stratton— 
with  Land  in  the  Parish.  'Eeg.  Epis.  Glasg.] 


WILLIAM  DE  BONDINGTON. 


470 


X.  WILLIAM  DE  BONDINGTON,     A.D.  1233-58, 

Of  an  ancient  Family  in  the  Shire  of  Berwick.  He  was 
Rector  of  Edelstone,  a  Prebendary  of 
Glasgow,  one  of  the  Clerici  Cancellarii, 
and  afterwards  Archdeacon  of  St. 
Andrews,  within  the  bounds  of  Lothi 
an,  and  a  Privy  Councillor  to  King- 
Alexander  II.,  who  advanced  him  in 
1231  to  the  Chancellor's  Office.  The 
next  year  he  was  Elected  Bishop  of 
Glasgow,  and  Consecrated  in  the  Ca 
thedral  Church  by  Andrew,  Bishop  of 
Moray,  "Dominica  post  nativitatem 
Leatie  Marine,  anno  Dom.  1233." 
rt  Metros.]  William  de  Bondington, 
Chancellor  (but  without  the  designa 
tion  of  Bishop)  is  Witness,  after  "  G. 
episcop.  Aberdonen.,"  to  a  Charter  by 
King  Alexander  II.  at  Aberdeen,  9th 
October,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his 
lleign.  William,  the  Chancellor,  is 
Elect  of  Glasgow  in  the  nineteenth 
year  of  King  Alexander  \Keho],  and 
he  is  Bishop  here  the  3rd  of  July  in 
the  same  nineteenth  year  of  King 
Alexander  II.,  i.e.,  anno  Dom.  1233. 
[Aberbr.]  On  being  appointed  to  the 
See,  he  took  down  the  old  part  of  the 
Cathedral,  which  had  been  left  by 
Bishop  Joceline,  and  rebuilt  it  in  the 

1  •   i     •  •  TT  Th°  ligure  on  tuo  Seal  is  the 

manner  in  which  it  now  is.      tie  is   pame  os  thal  of  Willter. 
Bishop  here   and  Chancellor   in   the      On  the  Counter  Seal  is  a 
twentieth    year    of    King    Alexander  figure  of  s.  Kentigern,  vested ;  in 
(Cart.  Ba^and  in  the  twenty-first  ^^^±£,,"1 

year    Of  the    Said    King.       [Cart.    MOT.]    Bishop,    kneeling    before     him. 

He  was  Bishop  about  1235.     ~T)ur-   A.D.  WST.    [Mehos  Charters.} 


480 


BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 


ham  MSS.l  He  is  mentioned  in  a  Chart  of  Confirmation  of 
the  Lands  of  Saltoun  in  1236-38,  and  in  a  Chart  of  Con 
firmation  of  the  Church  of  Ord  in  1255-56.  [Mid-Lothian 
Charters:  Bannaty ne  Club.]  He  is  Bishop  here  in  1239.  [Account 
of  Religious  Houses,  pp.  477,  496;  also  Cart.  Camlusk.}  He 
grants  and  Confirms  several  Churches  to  the  Abbey  of  Paisley 
in  1239.  [Cart.  Pallet.]  In  1240,  Pope  Gregory  IX.  having 
called  a  General  Council,  upon  pretext  of  relief  to  the  Holy 
Land,  and  the  Emperor,  Frederick  II.,  who  was  on  ill  terms 
with  the  Pope,  apprehending  the  design  to  be  against  himself, 
caused  several  Prelates  to  be  stopped,  and  Bishop  Bondington 
among  the  rest,  on  their  way  through  Germany  towards  Rome, 
and  dismissed  them  only  upon  promise  not  to  proceed  in  their 
journey.  It  would  appear  that  he  continued  in  the  Chancellor's 
Office  till  the  Death  of  King  Alexander  II.  He  was  Bishop  in 
1244,  and  in  the  first  year  of  King  Alexander  III.,  i.e.,  A.D. 
1249  [Cart.  PasL};  in  the  years  1235,  1245,  1250,  and  1251 
[Kelso^ ;  in  1254  [Jli/iner] ;  in  1256  '  Ula^j.  et  C'anihu.^.' ;  in  1257 
[Metros'.  -J'ide  Charters  of  the  Hospital  of  Soltre :  Jlannatijne 
CUih.]  He  was  contemporary  with  Allan,  Bishop  of  Argyle. 
This  Bishop  finished  the  Cathedral  of  Glasgow  out  of  his  own 
liberality.  -lied.  Boetli.  Hist.  He  wrote  "  De  Translations 
Dom.  Margaretae  Reginae,  et  Regis  Malcolmi  ejus  mariti." 
^Dempster.  In  the  last  year  of  his  life,  with  the  consent  of  the 
Chapter,  he  introduced  into  his  Diocese  the  use  of  the  Liturgy  of 
the  Church  of  Sarum,  or  Salisbury,  a  Copy  of  which  Rescript  is 
here  subjoined:— 


Omnibus  Chris ti  fidelibus,  prae- 
sens  script um  visuris  vcl  audituris, 
'Willielmus,  miscrationc  Divina 
Ecclesiae  Glascuensis  minister, 
sfilutem  in  Domino.  Officii  nostri 
debitum  remediis  invigilat  subdito- 
rum,  inter  quos  Ecclesiae  nostrao 
cathedralis  minhtros  prosequimur 
favore  spiritual!,  cui  spiritual!  con- 
jngio  copulamur,  et  cujus  ministri 
nobis,  tanquam  membra  capiti,  in- 
dissolubili  caritate  coherent.  At- 
teudentes  igitur  ecclesiam  Saris- 


"NVilliarn,  by  the  mercy  of  God, 
Minister  of  the  Church  of  Glasgow, 
health  in  the  Lord— To  all  the 
faithful  in  Christ  likely  to  see  or 
hear  of  this  present  Writing.  The 
duty  of  our  Office  is  to  watch  over 
the  improvement  of  those  under  us, 
among  whom  we  look  upon  with 
spiritual  favour  the  Ministers  of 
our  Cathedral  Church,  to  whom  we 
are  joined  in  spiritual  union,  and 
the  Ministers  of  which  are  united  to 
us,  like  the  body  to  the  head,  in 


WILLIAM  DE  BONDINGTON. 


481 


buriensem,  inter  ceteras  Ecclesias 
Cathedrales,  libertatibus  et  consue- 
tudinibus  approbatis  ornatam,  eis- 
dem  canonicis  nostris,  libertates  et 
consuetudines  dicta?  Ecclesire  Saris- 
buriensis,  do  consensu  capituli  do- 
namus,  et  conccdimus,  statuentes 
de  consensu  ejusdem  capituli,  tit 
libertates  et  consuetudines  prfe- 
nominata?  Ecclesire  in  Ecclesia 
Glascuensi  in  perpetuuni  observen- 
tur.  Datum  apud  Alencrumb,  die 
Sancti  Leonardi,  anno  Gratiac  mil- 
lesimo  ducentesiuio  quinquagesimo 
octavo. 


indissoluble  love.  Keeping  in  view, 
therefore,  the  Church  of  Sarum 
provided,  among  other  Cathedral 
Churches,  with  approved  Privileges 
and  Customs,  we  give  and  grant  to 
our  said  Canons  the  Privileges  and 
Customs  of  the  said  Church  of 
Sarum,  with  consent  of  the  Chap 
ter  ;  ordaining,  with  consent  of  the 
said  Chapter,  that  the  Privileges 
and  Customs  of  the  aforesaid  Church 
be  in  all  time  coming  observed  in 
the  Church  of  Glasgow. — Given  at 
Ancrurn  on  S.  Leonard's  Day,  in 
the  year  of  grace  1258. 


The  Ritual  of  Sarum,  composed  by  Bishop  Osmund  in  107G, 
had  been  very  generally  adopted,  even  beyond  the  authority  of 
the  English  Church.  The  Chapter  obtained  from  the  Dean  and 
Chapter  of  Salisbury,  a  formal  statement  of  their  Constitution, 
which  ever  after  formed,  as  it  were,  the  Charter  of  Privileges  of 
the  Glasgow  Chapter.  Some  say  that  it  was  only  in  Bishop 
William's  time  that  this  See  was  divided  into  the  two  Arch 
deaconries  of  Glasgow  and  Teviotdale. 

The  Bishop  seems  to  have  preferred  his  native  Borders,  and 
latterly  resided  much  at  his  House  of  Alncrum,  in  Teviotdale. 
Many  of  his  Charters  are  Dated  there.  He  obtained  from  Ralph 
Burnard,  a  right  of  Fuel  in  his  Peataries  of  Faringdun,  for  the 
use  of  his  House  of  Alnecrumbe,  to  himself  and  his  Successors 
for  ever.  ^Preface,  p.  xxix.,  Peg.  Epis.  Glasg.,  and  Orig.  Paroch., 
vol.  ?'.,  p.  305.1  He  Died  here  on  the  10th,  and  was  Interred  on 
the  13th  November,  1258,  in  the  Abbey  Church  of  Melrose, 
near  the  High  Altar.  [Cliron.  Metros.] 

Since  the  Death  of  Joceline,  little  progress  appears  to  have 
been  made  with  the  building  of  the  Cathedral.  Bondington, 
however,  is  said  by  Boe'ce  to  have  finished  the  Structure.  In 
1231,  the  Chapter  was  deep  in  debt ;  but  William  of  Bondington, 
a  Prelate  of  energy,  having  been  appointed  to  the  See  two  years 
afterwards,  1400  Marks,  due  to  Merchants  of  Florence,  were 
discharged  in  1240.  It  was  about  the  same  time  that  Forveleth, 
the  widowed  Countess  of  the  Lennox,  gave  to  the  Fabric  a  piece 

VOL.  II.  3  P 


482  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

of  Laud  on  the  Banks  of  that  Stream  of  Leven  of  which  Smollett 
has  sung  so  sweetly.  The  Bishop  had  not  failed  to  have  recourse 
to  the  great  instrument  of  Church  Building  in  the  Thirteenth 
Age — the  no  less  effective  cause  of  Church  destruction  in  the 
Sixteenth — "Papal  Indulgences,"  or  Dispensations  by  the  Pope, 
granting  release  from  the  heavy  hurdens  of  Ecclesiastical  Dis 
cipline  to  all  Penitents  promoting  the  undertaking.  To  add  new 
force  to  this  Remission,  a  Canon  was  passed  by  a  Provincial 
Council  of  the  Scottish  Clergy  held  at  Perth  in  1242,  ordaining 
that  the  Indulgence  for  the  Cathedral  of  Glasgow  be  hung  up  in 
every  Church  in  the  Piealm ;  that  its  terms  be  plainly  expounded 
in  the  Vulgar  Tongue  to  the  Parishioners ;  that  on  every  Lord's 
Day  and  Festival  from  Ash- Wednesday  to  Low- Sunday,  after  the 
Gospel  is  read,  the  duty  of  Contributing  to  the  Work  be  enjoined 
on  the  people  ;  that  their  Alms  and  Legacies,  together  with  the 
Goods  of  persons  dying  intestate,  be  faithfully  collected ;  and, 
during  the  season  so  specified,  for  no  other  object  than  this  shall 
Offerings  be  solicited  in  the  Parish  Churches.  To  the  fruits  of 
this  Ordinance,  doubtless,  we  owe  the  completion  of  the  beautiful 
Choir  before  1258.  [Quarterly  Eevieiv,  cxlix.] 

XI.  JOHN  DE  CHEYAM.     A.D.  1260-68. 

John  de  Cheyam,  al.  Cheam — [It  is  Chicham  according  to  a 
Papal  Bull  to  be  found  in  Aijloffe,  p.  339 ;  and  Chiham  in  the 
same  Document  as  Printed  by  Eijmcr,  vol.  ?'.,  p.  2161 — seems  to 
derive  his  name  from  the  Village  of  Cheam,  in  the  County  of 
Surrey.  Ho  was  an  Englishman,  and,  when  Archdeacon  of 
Bath  and  Chaplain  to  Pope  Alexander  IV.,  was  by  that  Pope 
Consecrated  the  next  Bishop  of  this  See  in  1260,  through  the 
plenitude  of  his  Apostolic  power,  as  he  himself  relates,  after  he 
had  cassed  and  annulled  the  Postulation  which  had  passed  in 
favour  of  Nicholas  Moffat,  Archdeacon  of  Teviotdale,  to  be  Con 
secrated  Bishop  here.  [Rijmer.]  The  occasion  of  which  conduct 
of  the  Pope  is  said  to  have  been  this  : — Mr.  Moffat  having  gone 
to  Rome  for  Consecration,  the  Pope,  upon  his  refusing  to 
advance  him  money,  and  by  the  intrigues  of  Robert,  Elect  of 
Dunblane,  who  hoped  to  get  into  this  See  of  Glasgow,  would  not 


NICOL  DE  MOFFAT.  -18B 

Consecrate  him,  but  Promoted  John  de  Cheyam  to  the  See. 
The  Pope,  it  seems,  was  sensible  how  disagreeable  this  step 
would  prove  to  our  King,  and  therefore  took  care  to  solicit  the 
King  of  England  to  employ  his  interest  with  the  King  of  Scotland 
(for  he  was  father-in-law  to  our  King),  that  he  might  graciously 
receive  Cheyam,  and  grant  his  Temporalities  to  be  punctually 
paid  to  him.  It  seems  also  that  our  King  was  not  at  all  satis 
fied  ;  for  upon  Cheyam's  coming  into  this  Kingdom,  he  became 
very  disagreeable  both  to  the  King  and  to  his  own  Clergy.  In 
1260,  King  Alexander  III.  sent  Messengers  to  Home  to  entreat 
Pope  Alexander  IV.  to  annul  the  appointment  of  his  Chaplain, 
John  of  Cheam,  to  the  See  of  Glasgow.  The  Pope  declared  that 
to  be  impossible,  but  professed  himself  anxious  to  comply  with 
certain  other  requests  preferred  to  him  on  the  part  of  the  King, 
viz.,  that  he  (the  King)  should  keep  its  Temporalities  until  the 
Bishop  take  the  Scottish  Oath  of  Allegiance.  The  Rescript  is 
Dated  21st  May,  1260.  "Tlicincr,  Mon.  Vet.  Hib.  et.  Scot.,  pp. 
86,  87."!  J.  is  Bishop  in  1264  [Kcho]  ,  and  John  in  1266. 
^Glasr/.]  Cheyam  made  choice  to  live  in  foreign  parts,  and  at 
the  Court  of  Rome.  He  Died  and  was  Buried  at  Meaux,  in 
France,  in  1268.  [Melros.] 

XII.  NICOL  DE  MOFFAT.     Elect.     1268-70. 

Nicholaus  de  Mofl'at,  Archdeacon  of  Teviotdale,  above  mentioned,  was 
again  Elected  Bishop  immediately  upon  the  Death  of  Bishop  Cheyam,  in 
1268.  "Electus  est  (says  Fm-dm,  ml.  il.,  ]>.  109)  Magister  Nicholaus  de 
Mofl'at  archidiaconus  Tevidaliae,  qui  etiam  ante  dictum  Joannem  electus 
fuit  in  episcopum,  sed  fraude  canonicorum  suorum,  ut  praeacripsimus, 
cassatus,  vir  sauctae  vitac  et  dapsilitatis."  He  continued  Elect  of  this  See 
above  two  years,  and  Died  A.D.  1270,  without  ever  being  Consecrated,  which 
was  owing  to  the  strong  opposition  made  against  him  by  his  own  Canons, 
spirited  up  by  others  of  the  Clergy.  "  Anno  MCCLXX.  Magister  Nicholaus  de 
Moffat  mortuus  est,  qui  se  nimis  proterve  contra  religiosos  et  alias  ecclesias- 
ticas  personas  gerebat :  cui,  ad  regis  instantiam,  Magister  Wilhelmus 
Wischard,  archidiacouus  Sancti  Andreae,  et  Domini  regis  cancellarius, 
electus  est ;  vir  magnae  sagacitatis  et  astutiae."  [Fordnn,  rol.  ii.,  p.  112.] 
He  Died,  according  to  Mr.  Hay's  MS.,  of  Apoplexy,  at  Tyningham,  in  East 
Lothian.  [Mac/.] 


484 


BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 


XIII.  WILLIAM  WISHABT.     Elect.     1270. 

William  Wisehearfc,  Archdeacon  of  St.  Andrews,  and  Lord  High  Chan 
cellor,  was  Elected  to  this  See  A.D.  1270,  after  the  death  of  Bishop  Moffat, 
but  before  his  Consecration.  He  was  likewise  Elected  to  the  See  of  St. 
Andrews,  then  vacant  by  the  Death  of  Bishop  Gameline.  [Chron.  Vidros.} 
— For  more  of  Bishop  Wishart,  see  Scotichronicon,  vol.  i.,  p.  170. 

XIV.  ROBERT  WISHART.     A.D.  1272-1316, 

"  Robert  Wiseheart,  archidiaconus  Sti  Andreae,  infra  partes 


On  the  Seal,  under  a  rich  Gothic  Canopy,  is  the  figure  of  a  Bishop,  vested ; 
liis  right  hand  raised,  and  his  left  holding  the  Cro/ier,  standing  on  a  Lion  crouch 
ing.  On  each  side  of  the  Bishop  is  the  head  of  a  Saint  in  front,  crowned  with 
the  Nimbus,  perhaps  meant  for  the  heads  of  S.  Kentigern  and  S.  David;  below 
the  dexter  head  is  a  Bird,  and  beneath  the  sinister  one  a  Fish  with  a  gemmed 
Ring  in  its  mouth. 

In  the  upper  compartment  or  niche  of  the  Counter  Seal  is  a  Monk  present 
ing  to  S.  Kentigern  the  Fish  with  the  jewelled  King  in  its  mouth,  which,  by  his 
command,  had  been  caught  in  the  Clyde.  In  the  dexter  side  of  the  middle  niche 
is  a  figure  with  a  Sword  in  his  hand ;  in  the  sinister  a  figure  of  the  Queen  hold 
ing  the  Ring  in  her  hand.  In  the  lower  niche  is  a  Bishop  kneeling,  and  on  each 
side  are  heads  of  Saints  similar  to  the  Seal.  A.D.  1315.  [Melros  Charters^} 


BOBEET  WISHAET. 


•185 


Laudoniae,"  and  nephew  or  cousin  to  the  preceding  William 

Wischart,  was  next  Elected  and  Consecrated  Bishop  of  this  See, 

on  the  Sunday  before  the  Purification,  A.D.  1272,  at  Aberdeen,  by 

the  Bishops  of  Aberdeen,  Moray,  and  Dunblane.    \Chron.  Helros.] 

R.  was  Bishop  A.D.   1273  [Cart.  Glasg.  ct  Kelso]]   A.D.   1275^ 

1293,  and  1296,  also  1310  [Cart.  Glasg.];  A.D.  1276,  1293,  and 

1305.     [Cart.  Paslct.]    In  1277,  Maurice,  Lord  of  Luss,  granted 

to  the  Church  of  Glasgow  whatever  Timber  might  be  required  for 

the  Tower  and  Treasury  of  the  Cathedral,  and  protection  to  all 

those  who  should  be  employed  in  cutting,  preparing,  and  carrying 

it,  and  Pasturage  for  their  Horses 

and    Oxen  while  employed  in  the 

work.      [Cart.    Glasg.]      Robert    is 

Bishop,  and  in  the  thirtieth  year  of 

King   Alexander   III.    [Cart.  Dun- 

ferm.],  he  is  Witness  to  a  Charter 

by  the  Lord  High  Steward  of  Scot 

land  A.D.  1294.    [Hay.]    He  swears 

fealty  to  King  Edward  I.  of  Eng 

land  A.D.  1296.     He  is  Bishop  in 

1309  [Errol],  and  in  1315.    [Kelso.] 

This  worthy  Patriot  was  appointed 

one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Regency 

upon  the  Death  of  King  Alexander 

III.  A.D.  1286,  which  Office  he  dis 

charged  with  great  reputation  and 

integrity.  When  the  War  broke  out, 

by   reason    of   the    encroachments 

King  Edward  I.  of  England  made   A  fi^e  of  a  Bishop  as  before.    At 

,  -,       ,  -.    ,     ,  -.  the  dexter  side  a  Bird  on  a  Branch 

upon  the  honour  and  independency  of  Ivy>  and  at  the  sinister  the  Fish 
of  Scotland,  no  man  did  more  vigor-  and  Ring.  A.D.  1-29-2.  [Chapter 
ously  withstand  the  tyranny  than  Hmlse>  »«"'»'«"«••] 
this  Prelate;  for  which  freedom  he  was  thrown  into  prison  by 
King  Edward,  and  that  King  wrote  to  the  Pope  to  have  him 
deprived  of  his  Bishopric,  in  regard  that  the  Bishop  (says  the 
King)  was  his  greatest  enemy  ;  and  had  it  not  been  out  of  fear 
of  the  Pope,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  the  Bishop,  being  the 


Another  Seal  of  Bishop  Robert, 


480  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

King's  prisoner,  would  have  been  put  to  Death,  as  were  many  of 
the  Scottish  Nobility.  "Burner's  Fo'dcra.  Bishop  Wishart 
remained  eight  years  a  prisoner  in  England,  and  was  not  released 
till  after  the  victory  of  the  Battle  of  Bannockbum  in  1314,  when 
he  was  restored  with  Bruce's  wife,  sister,  and  daughter,  and  the 
young  Earl  of  Mar,  in  exchange  for  the  Earl  of  Hereford,  who 
had  been  captured  in  the  Castle  of  Bothwell,  to  which  he  had 
retreated  after  that  signal  defeat.  Barbour  says  that  the  Bishop 
had  become  blind  before  his  release. 

The  affectionate  sympathy  expressed  by  King  Robert  Bruce 
for  this  Bishop,  would  serve  to  give  us  some  insight  into  his 
character,  even  if  the  history  of  Robert  Wise-hard  were  not  so 
well  known.  It  was  a  time  when  strong  oppression  on  the  one 
side  made  the  other  almost  forget  the  laws  of  good  faith  and 
humanity.  Our  Bishop  did  homage  to  the  Suzerain,  and 
transgressed  it ;  he  swore  fidelity  over  and  over  again  to  the 
King  of  England,  and  as  often  broke  his  Oath.  He  kept  no  faith 
with  Edward.  He  Preached  against  him  ;  and,  when  the  occasion 
offered,  he  buckled  on  his  armour,  like  a  Scotch  Baron,  and 
fought  against  him.  But  let  it  not  be  said  he  changed  sides  as 
fortune  changed.  When  the  weak  Baliol  renounced  his  allegiance 
to  his  Overlord,  the  Bishop,  who  knew  both,  must  have  divined 
to  which  side  victory  would  incline,  and  yet  he  opposed  Edward. 
When  Wallace,  almost  single-handed,  set  up  the  Standard  of 
Revolt  against  the  all-powerful  Edward,  the  Bishop  of  Glasgow 
immediately  joined  him.  When  Robert  Bruce,  friendless  and  a 
fugitive,  raised  the  old  War-Cry  of  Scotland,  the  Bishop  sup 
ported  him.  Bruce  was  proscribed  by  Edward,  and  under  the 
Anathema  of  the  Church.  The  Bishop  assoilzicd  him  for  the 
sacrilegious  slaughter  of  Comyn,  in  the  Greyfriars'  Church,  at 
Dumfries,  and  prepared  the  Robes  and  Royal  Banner  for  his 
Coronation.  Wischard  was  taken  prisoner  in  the  Castle  of 
Cupar,  which  he  had  held  against  the  English  in  1306,  and  was 
not  liberated  till  after  Bannockburn.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  that 
long  confinement  that  wTe  find  Robert  commiserating  his  tedious 
imprisonment,  his  chains,  and  persecutions,  so  patiently  endured 
for  the  rights  of  the  Church  and  the  Kingdom  of  Scotland. 


STEPHEN  DE  DONYDOWEE.  487 

This  excellent  Prelate  having  had  the  happiness  to  see  King 
Robert  Bruce  fully  seated  on  the  Throne,  to  which  he  had  not  a 
little  contributed,  Died  on  the  26th  of  November,  1316,  and  was 
Buried  in  the  Cathedral  of  Glasgow,  between  the  Altars  of  S. 
Peter  and  S.  Andrew.  He  only  survived  his  liberation  two  years. 
One  charge  of  Edward  against  Bishop  Wischard  was,  that  he  had 
used  Timber  which  he  had  allowed  him  for  building  a  Steeple  to 
his  Cathedral,  in  constructing  Engines  of  War  against  the  King's 
Castles,  and  especially  the  Castle  of  Kirkintoluch  [Kirkintilloch]. 
[Beg.  Epis.  (Has ft.} 

The  Bishops  of  Glasgow  had  a  House  or  Castle  at  Carstairs 
from  a  very  early  period.  Bishop  Robert  held  a  Court  there  in 
1273,  whereat  a  dispute  between  the  Abbey  of  Kelso  and  Sir 
Symon  Loccard  as  to  the  Teinds  of  Symonton  was  arranged. 
[Lib.  tie  CaL,  267,  334.1  Bishop  Robert  began  to  construct  a 
stronger  Castle  at  Carstairs  between  the  years  1287  and  1290, 
which  was  not  completed  in  1292,  when  Edward  I.  issued  the 
following  Letter  or  Precept: — "  As  the  venerable  Father,  R., 
Bishop  of  Glasgow,  upon  his  Manor  of  Casteltarris,  in  the  County 
of  Lanark,  began  to  make  a  certain  Castle  of  Stone  and  Lime, 
after  the  death  of  King  Alexander,  without  our  License  and 
pleasure,  we,  however,  wishing  to  do  him  a  special  grace  in  this 
matter,  consent,  for  ourselves  and  our  Successors,  that  he  may 
finish  the  said  Castle,  and  when  so  finished,  hold  it  by  himself 
and  his  Successors  for  ever ;  and  we  discharge  any  proceedings 
against  him  on  account  of  his  having  begun  the  said  Castle 
without  our  License."  [Hot.  Scot.}  The  Bishop  was  inhabiting 
this  Castle  in  1294,  when  he  granted  an  Inhibition  in  support  of 
the  rights  of  the  Abbey  of  Paisley.  [Beg.  de  Passalct,  201.]  The 
Castle  has  long  ago  been  demolished.  Some  of  the  carved 
stones  preserved  at  Carstairs  House  may  possibly  have  belonged 
to  it,  although  the  most  part  of  them  must  certainly  be  assigned 
to  the  ancient  Church.  [Irving' s  Upper  Ward  of  Lanark,  p.  458.] 

XV.  STEPHEN  DE  DONYDOWER.     Elect.     A.D.  1817. 
Stephen  de  Donydower  was  descended  from  the  Dundemores,  or  Dun- 


488  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

mofres,  of  that  Ilk,  an  ancient  Family  in  Fife.  He  is  by  some,  but 
erroneously,  called  Dundee.  He  was  Chancellor  of  this  Church,  of  which 
he  was  Elected  Bishop  A.B.  1317;  but,  being  an  enemy  to  the  English 
interest,  King  Edward  II.  wrote  to  the  Pope  that  he  would  not  admit 
Stephanum  de  Dundemor,  Avho  was  Elect  of  this  Church,  to  the  Bishopric. 
[Rymer.]  Indeed  it  would  appear  he  never  was  Consecrated,  having  Died, 
they  say.  on  his  way  to  Piome  ;  and  the  above-mentioned  Authority  avers 
that  King  Edward  of  England,  during  the  Vacancy  of  this  See,  conferred 
Presentations  to  the  Prebends  of  this  Church.  In  a  Charter  by  King  Robert 
Bruce  in  favour  of  Piobert,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  Stephen  de  Donydon,  Canon 
of  Glasgow,  and  "  camerario  nostro,''  is  one  of  the  Witnesses.  [Cart.  Glascj.} 


Considerable  confusion  now  surrounds  the  History  of  this 
See.  John  de  Lindesay  and  John  de  Wischart  were  both 
Bishops  of  Glasgow  between  1318  and  1334 ;  but  it  is  not  easy 
to  distinguish  their  Episcopates.  It  would  rather  seem  that 
John  dc  Wischart,  who  was  previously  Archdeacon,  was  Elected 
Bishop  in  1319,  and  Lindesay  succeeded  him  in  1321.  The  See 
was  vacant  in  1318  (not  1313),  3rd  February.  [Reg.  Pas.]  It 
was  vacant  again  in  July,  on  the  Eve  of  S.  James,  A.D.  1321. 
[Melr.,  p.  387-8],  and  at  Christmas  of  the  same  year.  In  Innes' 
MS.  Note-Books,  we  find  the  Bishop  named  John  de  Lindsay  in 
1319,  1322,  and  1325.  Innes  had  Charters  and  Seals  of  the 
Bishop,  which  gave  him  the  means  of  ascertaining  this  point. 
But  his  attention  may  not  have  been  called  to  it,  as  he  makes  no 
mention  of  John  de  Wischart.  [Preface,  p.  xxxvi.,  Reg.  Epis. 
Glasg.  Ha  Man  d  Cliib.} 

Grub,  in  his  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  345,  in  a  Note,  says  :— 
"  Keith,  Chalmers,  and  the  Editor  of  the  Glasgow  Chartulary, 
differ  in  their  accounts  of  the  Bishops  who  came  after  Stephen. 
But  they  are  agreed  that  his  two  immediate  Successors  were 
named  John — one  bearing  the  name  of  Wishart,  the  other  that 
of  Lindsay,  and  that  Wishart  previously  held  the  Office  of  Arch 
deacon  of  the  Diocese.  Bishop  Keith,  and,  with  some  hesitation, 
Mr.  Cosmo  Innes,  place  Wishart  before  Lindsay;  Chalmers 
thinks  that  Lindsay  preceded  Wishart.  I  can  find  no  sufficient 
evidence  that  John  Wishart  was  ever  Bishop  of  Glasgow.  The 


JOHN  WISHART.  489 

See  was  vacant  in  February,  1318,  and  at  Christmas,  1321. 
John  was  Bishop  in  March,  1322  ;  at  Lady  Day,  1324  ;  in  April, 
1325 ;  in  March,  1326  ;  and  so  on  till  after  the  accession  of 
David  II.  The  See  was  vacant  by  the  decease  of  John  in  Feb 
ruary,  133G,  and  Bishop  William  Kae  speaks  of  John  de  Lindsay 
as  his  Predecessor.  In  all  these  Notices  there  is  nothing  to 
induce  a  belief  that  there  were  tiro  Bishops  of  the  name  of  John  ; 
and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that,  in  1325,  John  Wishart 
was  still  Archdeacon  of  Glasgow.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  Writ 
in  which  a  Bishop  of  the  name  of  John  Wishart  is  mentioned. 
A  Writ  in  the  'Foedera'  (vol.  ii.,  part  i.,  p.  401),  to  which  the 
Date  of  19th  July,  1319,  is  assigned,  mentions  '  J.,  Glasguensis 
Episcopus,'  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  Date  can  be  relied  on." 


XVI.  JOHN  OF  EGLESCLIFF.     A.D.  1318. 

This  Bishop  seems  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of  our  Scottish 
Writers.  He  was  a  Dominican  Friar,  a  Penitentiary  of  the 
Pope,  and  was  appointed  to  the  See  of  Glasgow  by  Pope  John 
XXII.,  on  the  17th  July,  1318.  It  may  be  doubted  if  he  ever 
got  possession  of  the  Bishopric.  He  was  Translated  from 
Glasgow  to  Connor,  and  from  Connor  to  Landaff,  in  1323-4  ; 
and  Died  on  the  2nd  January,  1346-7.  [Tlicincr,  Vet.  Hon. 
Hib.  ct  Scot.,  pp.  202,  226  ;  Dr.  Reeve*  EccL  Antiq.  of  Down 
and  Connor,  p.  257  ;  Lc  Neve,  Fast.  EccL  Anglic.,  vol.  ii.,  p. 
246,  Edit.  1854;  Grub's  EccL  Hist.  Scot.,  vol.  i.,  pp.  345,  346. 

XVII.  JOHN  WISHART.     A.D.  1319. 

John  Wishart  came  into  this  See  in  the  year  1319.  [Rymer.[ 
He  had  been  formerly  Archdeacon  of  this  same  Church.  He  is 
Bishop  here  16th  December,  the  nineteenth  year  of  King  Robert 
I.  [Cart.  Abcrbr.],  A.D.  1325  [Cart.  Glasy.],  and  John  was  Bishop 
here  in  the  twentieth  year  of  King  Robert  Bruce. 
Prelate  was  also  an  enemy  to  the  English  interest  in  this 
Country  ;  and  so  there  is  an  order  by  King  Edward,  after  he  had 
fallen  into  that  King's  hands,  while  he  was  yet  Archdeacon,  to 


VOL.  II. 


490 


BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 


convey  this  John  Wiseheart,  "quondam  archidiaconum  Glas- 
guen.,"  then  a  prisoner  in  the  Castle  of  Conway,  to  the  City  of 
Chester,  and  from  thence  to  the  Tower  of  London,  6th  April, 
1310.  [rtijmer.  It  is  very  probable  he  was  released  after  the 
Battle  of  Bannockburn,  when  Bishop  Robert  Wishart  and  others 
were  exchanged  for  English  prisoners  in  the  year  1822.  "  Jo 
hannes  Dei  gratia  episcopus  Grlasguen.  cum  unanimi  consensu  et 
assensu  capituli  sui,"  ///ivs  "  ecclesiae  Sanctae  Crucis  de  Edin 
burgh,  et  canonicis  ibidem  Deo  servientibus,  ecclesiam  de  Dal- 
garnock,  nostrae  dioces.," — dat.  21st  March,  1322.  The  same 
Grant  is  Confirmed  by  Pope  John  XXII.  '-Cart.  Glasf}.'  This 
Prelate  Died  in  1325. ' 


(Xu.  1.)  (Xo.  2.) 

The  following  is  taken  from  Mr.  Macgeorge's  "Armorial  Insignia  of  Glasgow,' 
p.  22-2(5: — "In  the  Glasgow  Chartulary,  and  also  in  H.  Laing's  Catalogue,  Seal 
No.  1  is  ascribed  to  John  Wyschard,  but  which  I  am  inclined  to  think  is  the  Seal  of 
John  Lindsay.  There  is  some  confusion  in  the  History  of  the  See  at  this  time,  and 
there  is  a  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between  the  Episcopates  of  these  two  Bishops. 
Professor  limes  inclines  to  the  opinion  that  Wyschard  was  Elected  in  1319,  and  that 
Lindsay  succeeded  him  in  1321 ;  but  if  this  was  so,  this  Seal  could  not  be  that  of 
Wyschard,  for  it  is  found  appended  to  one  of  the  Melrose  Charters  which  bears  the 
Date  of  1320,  at  which  time  there  seems  to  be  little  doubt  that  Lindsay  filled  the  See. 
I  am  confirmed  in  the  opinion  that  it  is  Lindsay's  Seal  from  the  circumstance  that, 
although  upon  the  Shield  on  the  sinister  side,  which  no  doubt  contained  the  paternal 
Arms  of  the  Bishop,  the  Bearings  have  become  too  much  defaced  to  be  clearly 


JOHN  LINDSAY.  -191 

XVIII.  JOHN  LINDSAY.     A.D.  1322. 

John  Lindsay,  of  the  illustrious  Family  of  the  Lindsays,  was 
the  following  Bishop  of  this  See.  In  1322,  Pope  John  XXII. 
appointed  John  of  Lindsay  to  the  See  of  Glasgow,  committing  to 
him  not  only  the  cure  of  the  Spirituality,  but  the  administration 
of  the  Temporality.  The  Bull  is  Dated  15th  March,  1323,  at 
Avignon.  Thcincr,  Vet.  Hon.  Hib.  ct  Scot.,  />.  226 ;  c.  /.,  p. 

deciphered,  they   are    evidently   the   same    as  appear   on   a  Shield  which  occupies 

the  same  position  on  Seal  No.  2 which  in  all  the  Chartularies  is  ascribed  to 

Bishop  Lindsay ;  and  this  by  the  way  is  one  of  the  many  instances  where  Heraldry, 
which  many  affect  to  despise,  comes  in  to  aid  the  investigations  of  History.  It  will 
be  observed  that  none  of  the  Emblems  [the  Tree,  the  Fish,  and  the  Bell]  appear  on 
this  Seal ;  but  it  is  interesting  as  the  first  on  which  we  iincl  Heraldry  introduced.  In 
the  upper  portion  of  the  Seal,  under  a  rich  Canopy,  is  the  figure  of  S.  Kentigern,  in 
the  act  of  Benediction  ;  and  in  a  niche  beneath  is  a  Bishop  kneeling.  On  the  dexter 
side  is  a  Shield  charged  with  what  Mr.  Laing  describes  as  the  Royal  Arms  of  Scot 
land,  but  which  are  as  likely  to  be  a  Lion  rampant  debruised  of  a  Ribbon  in  Bend— 
the  Bearings  of  Abernethy,  which  are  found  borne  on  the  Shields  of  many  of  the 
Lindsays.  On  the  sinister  side  is  another  Shield,  the  Bearings  of  which  are  not 
sufficiently  distinct  to  be  ascertained,  except  that  it  appears  to  be  charged  with  a 
Bend— a  Bearing  which  I  do  not  find  to  have  been  appropriate  to  the  Families  of 

cither  Lindsay  or  Wyschard 

••  Seal  No.  -2  is  certainly  that  of  John  dc  Lindsay,  being  his  Seal  •  for  Causes, 
the  Inscription  being  s'  joins  DEI  GKA.  EPI.  GLASGUEN.  AD  CAS.     Here  the  Fish  and  the 
Bird  again  appear,  but  the  Branch  is  absent.     This  also  is  a  finely  executed  Seal, 
and  the  Emblems,  which  are  not  Heraldic,  are  again  combined  on  it  with  Armorial 
Bearings      Mr.  Laing  describes  the  Shield  on  the  dexter  side  as  '  bearing  ermine  three 
bars  (?)  ;'  and  that  on  the  sinister  side  as  'bearing  an  Orlc  Vaire  surmounted  with  a 
Bend  '     On  both  Shields  the  Devices  are  very  indistinct ;  but  there  is  preserved  a 
curious  Instrument  of  Protest,  Dated  *3rcl  April,  1325,  taken  by  Bishop  Lindsay  in 
reference  to  the  loss  and  recovery  of  this  same  Seal,  and  from  which  we  ascertain 
with  certainty  whose  one  of  the  two  Shields  was.     It  appears  from  this  Instrument 
that  while  the  Bishop  was  residing  at  his  Manor  of  the  Lake  (Manenum  de  lacu  no 
doubt  the  House  at  what  is  now  called  '  Bishop's  Loch'),  the  Seal  had  been  1< 
Robert  del  Barkour.  near  the  Chapel  of  S.  Mary  of  Dunbretan,  and  found  and  restored 
to  him  bv  James  of  Irwyn,  a  Monk  of  '  Paselet '  [Paisley] ;  and  the  Seal  is  described 
as  containing  <  the  form  or  image  of  the  blessed  Bishop  Kentigern,  his  Patron,  along 
with  the  Shield  of  a  noble  man,  William  de  Concyaco,  on  one  side,  with  a  I 
ing  a  Ring  in  its  mouth  above  it,  and  his  own  Shield  on  the  other  with  a  little  Bird 
over  it '     The  Arms  of  the  Family  of  De  Coney  were  a  Barry  of  Six,  "\  aire,  and 
Gules,  which  quite  answers  to  what  we  are  able  to  discover  from  the  Impression. 
As  for  the  other  Shield,  I  cannot  explain  it ;  for.  as  I  have  already  stated  none  of  the 
Families  of  Lindsay,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  carried  a  Bend.     It  is  evidently,  however 
the  same  Device  as  appears  on  Seal  No.  1,  and  I  think  that  both  are  the  Seals  of 
Bishop  Lindsay.     If  it  be  so,  the  probability  is  that  Wyschard  succeed* 
in  the  Episcopate  instead  of  preceding  him." 


-192  BISHOPS  OF  THE  bEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

227.;  Ill  order  to  assert  the  right  of  the  Apostolic  See,  the  Pope 
reserved  to  his  own  Collation  the  Prebend  in  the  Cathedral, 
vacated  by  the  Promotion  of  this  Bishop  ;  and,  as  would  seem, 
bestowed  by  his  Holiness  upon  an  Italian,  Nicholas  de  Guercino, 
nephew  of  the  Italian  Prelate  who  Consecrated  the  Bishop  of 
Glasgow.  But  no  sooner  did  Lindsay  return  home,  than  he  was 
required  by  King  Robert  to  give  Institution  in  the  same  Prebend 
to  the  King's  Clerk,  Walter  of  Twynam,  who  had  been  presented 
by  the  King,  in  virtue  of  the  right  which,  he  said,  belonged  to 
him  and  his  Predecessors,  by  the  immemorial  custom  of  Scotland, 
of  Presenting  to  all  Benefices,  in  the  Bishop's  Collation,  fallen 
vacant  before  the  Bishop  had  taken  the  oath  of  fealty  and 
allegiance  to  the  King.  The  Bishop  was  thus  placed  in  a  position 
of  some  difficulty.  He  had  to  choose  between  laying  himself 
open  to  the  King's  displeasure  on  the  one  hand,  and  failing  in 
his  duty  to  maintain  the  right  of  the  Apostolic  See  on  the  other. 
He  took  a  middle  course.  He  admitted  the  King's  Presentee, 
saving  the  right  of  every  one  else,  and  protested  that  the  admis 
sion  should  not  in  any  way  prejudice  the  Pope.  The  King's 
Presentee  adhered  to  the  Protest,  and  by  Oath  and  by  Writ 
bound  himself  never  to  come  against  it :  Date,  22nd  March, 
1324-5,  at  Scone.  (Uccj.  Epis.  Glasy.,  vol.  /.,  pp.  230,  231.] 
John  Lindsay  was  certainly  in  the  See  in  132G-7,  as  appears 
by  a  Charter  of  King  Robert  I.  to  the  Monks  of  Melrose,  Dated 
March  22,  the  twentieth  year  of  the  King,  in  which  Charter  he 
is  expressly  designed  "John  Lindsay,  episcopus  Glasguen." 
John  was  Bishop  herein  1325  [Cart.  Glasy.],  and  in  the  twentieth 
year  of  the  Reign  of  King  Robert  Bruce.  ^Scone,  nt  supra.} 
This  John  Lindsay  was  Bishop  here  on  20th  March,  in  the 
twenty-second  year  of  the  Reign  of  King  Robert  I.  (Cart.  Abercl] 
He  was  likewise  Bishop  in  1329.  'Keho  ct  Xctrlot.] ,  and  in  the 
time  of  King  Edward  Baliol.  [Cart.  Glasg.}  When  that  Prince 
set  himself  up  to  be  King,  this  Bishop  entered  into  his  measures ; 
and  he,  together  with  the  Bishops  of  Aberdeen  and  Dunkeld,  are 
Witnesses  in  a  Grant  of  King  Edward  Baliol  to  Edward,  King  of 
England,  of  the  Date  the  12th  February,  1334.  [Feed.  Aug.] 
This  Prelate,  in  1335,  returning  from  Flanders  to  Scotland  with 


WILLIAM  EAE.  493 

two  ships,  aboard  which  were  250  Scots,  was  attacked  at  sea  by 
a  superior  fleet  of  English,  commanded  by  the  Earls  of  Saruiii 
and  Huntingdon,  &c.  The  Scots  vessels,  being  overpowered  by 
numbers,  were  taken,  after  an  obstinate  fight,  in  which  many  of 
both  sides  were  killed ;  and  the  Bishop,  being  mortally  wounded 
in  the  head,  immediately  expired. 

The  year  of  Bishop  Lindsay's  Death  is  disputed  ;  but,  as  the 
See  was  vacant  in  February,  1336  "Reg.  Epis.  Glas.,  p.  249-251], 
the  true  Date  seems  to  be  1335.  [Gnil's  Ecc.  Hist.  Scot.,  vol. 
/.,  p.  352,  Noic.\ 

About  the  Festival  of  Assumption,  1337,  two  ships,  coming 
from  France  to  Scotland,  were  encountered  and  taken  after  a 
stout  resistance,  by  John  de  Eos,  the  English  Admiral.  On 
board  were  John  de  Lindsay,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  and  with  him 
many  Noble  Ladies  of  Scotland  and  Men-at-arms,  and  X'30,000 
of  Money,  and  the  Instruments  of  Agreement  and  Treaty  between 
France  and  Scotland.  The  Men-at-arms  were  all  slain,  or 
drowned  in  the  sea.  The  Bishop  and  part  of  those  Noble  Ladies, 
for  very  grief,  refused  to  eat  or  drink,  and  Died  before  the  Fleet 
made  the  land.  Their  Bodies  are  Buried  in  Wytsande.  [Preface, 
p.  xxxvii.,  Reg.  Epis.  Glas.\ 

XIX.  WILLIAM  KAE.     A.D.  1335-67. 

William,  whose  Surname,  according  to  the  Document  Pub 
lished  by  the  Scots  College  at  Paris,  was  Eae,  and  who  is  called 
William  Fourth,  came,  it  is  thought,  into  this  See  in  1335  or 
1336,  and  Died  1367.  [The  difference  may  arise  from  the 
different  computations  of  the  year,  the  Scots  not  commencing 
the  year  at  that  time  until  the  25th  of  March  ;  and  this  is  to  be 
observed  in  all  our  computations.  This  way  of  reckoning  we 
only  left  off  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1600,  and  took  then  the 
1st  of  January  for  the  beginning  of  the  year.  Keith.]  From 
several  Records,  it  is  evident  that  he  succeeded  to  John  Lindsay, 
whom  he  particularly  designs  his  Predecessor  [Cart.  Paisley], 
and  by  the  same  Records  he  is  found  to  be  invested  in  the  See  in 
1335.  There  is  "  Confirmatio  Willielmi  episcopi  Grlasgu.  can- 


191  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

toriae  unius  sacerdotis,  tempore  Joannis  de  Lindsay,  episcopi 
Glasguen.,  praedecessoris  sui  fundatae,  Arc.,  10  die  mensis  Mail 
1358."  (Kelso,  fol.  211.  There  are  several  original  Writs  in 
this  Bishop's  name  tying  among  the  Archives  of  the  See  of 
Glasgow  preserved  in  the  Scots  College,  and  in  the  Monastery  of 
Carthusians,  in  Paris,  particularly  two  authentic  Acquittances  for 
the  Contribution  of  the  Diocese  of  Glasgow  to  the  Pope,  in  the 
years  1340  and  1341.  He  is  Witness  to  King  David  II.,  anno 
Regis  14  Pi.  Charters],  and  anno  Regis  15.  (Cart.  Alerbr.] 
William  is  Bishop  in  1342  and  1362  [Cart.  Glasy.],  yet  Walter 
is  named  Bishop  here  in  1357.  LFW.  Aug.,  vol.  ri.,  p.  633.] 
It  was  by  order  of  this  Bishop,  as  being  the  Pope's  Delegate, 
that  Robert,  Lord  High  Steward  of  Scotland,  and  Earl  of 
Strathern  (afterwards  King  of  Scotland  by  the  name  of  Robert 
II.),  did  erect  and  endow  a  Chaplainry  in  his  Church  of  Glasgow, 
upon  account  of  a  Dispensation  by  the  Apostolic  See  for  con 
tracting  of  Marriage  betwixt  the  said  Lord  High  Steward  and 
Elizabeth  More,  al.  Mure,  notwithstanding  the  impediment  of 
consanguinity  and  affinity  between  them.  The  Instrument  bears 
Date  January  12,  13G4.  Tcrc  Orleans  Hist.]  This  Bishop  is 
said  to  have  built  the  Stone  Bridge  of  Glasgow  over  the  River 
Clyde.  He  Died  on  the  27th  January,  1366-7. 

M'Ure,  in  his  "History  of  Glasgow,"  says— "  This  Prelate 
was  no  small  Benefactor  to  the  Town ;  for,  upon  his  charge,  he 
built  the  stately  Bridge  of  eight  Arches  over  the  River  Clyde. 
The  third  Arch,  at  the  North  end  thereof,  was  built  by  the  Lady 
Lochow ;  and  the  Bishop  built  the  other  seven,  which  still 
remains  a  monument  of  his  bounty  and  liberality  to  his  Episcopal 
Seat,  and  continued  entire  till  the  year  1671 ;  that  the  Southern 
most  Arch  fell,  but  was  quickly  reared  again  upon  the  charges  of 
the  Community.  There  was  much  of  the  care  of  Providence 
observed  with  regard  to  the  fall  of  that  Arch ;  for  it  was  the  7th 
of  July,  the  very  day  of  Glasgow  Fair,  and  about  12  of  the  clock, 
and  though  hundreds — yea,  I  may  venture  to  say,  thousands- 
had  passed  and  re-passed,  both  of  horse  and  foot,  yet  not  one 
single  person  got  the  least  harm,  which  was  wonderful,  all 
circumstances  considered ;  and  was  such  an  instance  of  the  kind- 


WALTER  WARDLAW.  495 

ness  of  Providence  that   ought  not  to  be  forgotten  to    latest 
posterity." 

XX.  WALTER  WARDLAW,  A.D.  1368-89, 
Of  the  Family  of  Torry  in  Fife,  Archdeacon  .of  Lothian,  and 
Secretary  to  King  David  II.,  was  Consecrated  Bishop  of  this  See 
in  1368  "Eijmcr,  yet  he  is  Bishop  here  in  the  thirty-eighth  year 
of  King  David  II.  \Cart.  Caml>ml:.\  i.e.,  anno  Domini  1367;  but 
the  time  of  the  year,  both  of  his  Consecration  and  of  the  begin 
ning  of  the  King's  Reign,  may  adjust  this  matter.  He  was 
Bishop  here  4th  July  anno  David  II.  39,  and  19th  April  anno 
Rob.  II.  primo.  ' Mar.}  He  was  Bishop  here  in  the  Parliament, 
and  at  the  Coronation  of  Robert  II.,  at  Scone,  27th  March, 
1371.  rRu(Uiman  against  Logan,  p.  398. ;  He  was  Promoted  to 
be  a  Cardinal  by  Pope  Clement  VII.  in  1381.  [Fordun.]  He 
was  created  Cardinal  and  Legate  for  Scotland  and  Ireland  in 
1384,  according  to  Fordun,  p.  1060.  [Mar.]  He  and  Beton 
were  the  only  Cardinals  in  the  Kingdom  of  Scotland.  We  find 
him  Bishop  here  in  the  sixth  year  of  the  said  Pope,  i.e.,  anno 
Domini  1384.  [Cart.  Paslet.]  In  the  Cartulary  of  Dunfermline, 
fol.  66,  the  following  Paper  is  to  be  seen,  viz.:— "  Valterus 
miseratione  divina  sanctae  Rom.  ecclesiro  cardinalis,  omnimodo 
potentate  legati  a  latere  in  Scotiae  et  Hiberniae  regnis  sufficienter 
fulcitus,  sub  sigillo  quo  dudum  utebamur  ut  episcopus  Glasguen. 
15to  die  mensis  Decembris,  Pontificatus  dementis  Papae  septimi 
anno  octavo."  He  was  Bishop  and  Cardinal  anno  10.  Rob.  II. 
\Eoyal  Charter*],  and  January  2. anno  Rob.  II.  16,  [Mar.] 
Fordun  says  he  Died  in  1387,  yet  we  find  him  (Walter)  still 
alive  on  the  10th  April,  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  King  Robert  II., 
i.e.,  anno  1389.  [Dipl.  et  Num.,  c.  27.]  Bishop  Wardlaw  and 
the  Bishop  of  Duukeld  were  Plenipotentiaries  for  negotiating  a 
Truce  with  England,  at  Bouloigne-sur-mer,  in  September,  1384. 
\Fadera,  vol.  vii.,  pp.  438,  441,  and  Rot.  Scot.,  p.  10.] 

After  the  Death  of  Cardinal  Wardlaw,  the  Pope  tried  to 
intrude  John  Framisden,  a  Friar  Minor,  into  this  See,  and  craved 
the  assistance  of  Richard  II.  for  his  settlement  per  vim.  The 
attempt  entirely  failed.  [Preface,  p.  xl,  Era.  Epis.  Glasc,: 


49(5  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

XXI.  MATTHEW  GLENDONING,     A.D.  1389, 

A  younger  son  of  Glendoning  of  that  Ilk  in  Eskclale,  whose 
successors  arc  now  designed  Glendonings  of  Partoim,  in  the 
Stewartry  of  Kirkcudbright,  was  first  one  of  the  Canons  of 
Glasgow,  and  succeeded  into  the  See  immediately  upon  the 
Death  of  Bishop  Wardlaw ;  for  we  find  him  Bishop  here  in  the 
nineteenth  year  of  King  Robert  II.  [DipL  ct  Xitnux.~.  He  was 
Bishop  in  the  twentieth  year  of  King  Robert  II.,  and  in  the  first 
year  of  King  Robert  III.  \Uoyal  Chart.] ;  the  fourth  year  of  King- 
Robert  III.  [Clackmannan] ;  the  sixth  year  of  King  Robert  III. 
[Mar.]  Matthew  is  Bishop  in  1305  and  1403  [Cart.  Glasg.], 
in  1401  [Nisbet's  Hmildry,  vol.  //.,  A)>p.,  p.  95],  anno  Robert 
III.  6to  Christ,  139G,  1398,  and  1408.  \Paslct.]  He  Died  in 
1408. 

In  his  time,  the  great  Steeple  of  the  Church,  which  had  been 
only  built  of  Timber  from  the  banks  of  Loch  Lomond,  covered 
with  lead,  was  burnt  by  lightning,  in  place  whereof  he  intended 
to  have  built  one  of  Stone,  for  which  he  had  made  good  prepara 
tion,  but  was  prevented  by  Death. 

In  1401,  Bishop  Mathew  taking  into  consideration  the  great 
and  detestable  want  of  Ornaments  in  the  Cathedral  of  Glasgow, 
ordained,  with  the  consent  of  the  Chapter,  that  every  one  who 
should  in  future  be  instituted  to  a  Prebend  therein,  even  by  way 
of  exchange,  should,  before  receiving  any  of  the  fruits  of  such 
Prebend,  pay  a  certain  portion  thereof  to  the  Dean  and  Chapter, 
for  the  purpose  of  providing  Vestments,  cappis,  casulis,  dalmaticis, 
tunicalibus,  and  other  Ornaments  necessary  for  Divine  Worship; 
and  to  prevent  future  Disputes,  fixed  the  sum  to  be  paid  by  each  ; 
that  payable  by  Casteltarris  being  two  Marcs.  [Reg.  Epis.  Glas., 
298,  320].  This  Ordinance  was  confirmed  by  Bishop  John,  who 
also  ordered  that  each  Prebend  should  find  a  fit  Vicar  or  Stal- 
larhts,  to  whom  they  should  annually  pay  a  certain  Stipend 
respectively.  The  sum  to  be  allowed  by  the  Prebend  of  Castel 
tarris  for  this  purpose  was  9  Marcs.  [Ibid.]  In  a  visitation  of 
the  Chapter  held  in  1501,  it  is  recorded  that  the  Prebend  of 
Casteltarris  has  not  kept  residence.  [Ibid.]  The  Canon  of 


WILLLUI  LAUDEPx. 


-197 


Carstairs  was,  however,  present  in  1539  at  a  Meeting  of  the 
Chapter,  solemnly  called  by  the  tolling  of  the  Bell,  "ad  sonum 
campanula  pulsate,  capitulariter  congregati.  [Lib.  Col.  N.I).  de 
Glasg.,  p.  60.] 

XXII.  WILLIAM  LAUDER,     A.D.  1408-25, 

Son  to  Sir  Allan  Lauder  of  Haltoun  (rulyo  Hatton),  in  the 
Shire  of  Mid-Lothian,  was  first 
Archdeacon  of  Lothian.  In  the 
year  1405,  there  is  a  safe-conduct 
from  the  King  of  England,  "  Ma- 
gistro  Guliclmo  Lauder  archi- 
diacono  Laudoniae,  veniendo  in 
regnum  Angliae,  penes  praesen- 
tiam  regis  pro  quibusdam  ne- 
gotiis  expediendis."  Eyiner^ 
When  the  See  of  Giasgow  be-  \| 
came  vacant  in  1408,  he  was  Pre-  ' 
ferred  merely  by  the  provision  of 
Pope  Benedict  XIII.,  who  setup 
for  Pope  at  Avignon,  in  opposi 
tion  to  Gregory  XII.  at  Rome 
[Fordun,  and  the  Life  of  Arch 
bishop  Chichek  Of  Canterbury],  Beneath  a  ric]lly  omamented  Canopy 
and  not  by  the  Election  Of  the  is  a  representation  of  the  Trinity;  the 

Chapter.    The  Chapter,  however,  Father,  with  the  Nimbus,  sitting  and 

T-I         ,    v  ,-,  •    ,  ,      supporting  between  his  knees  the  Son, 

did  not  dispute  the  appointment,  e^nded*on  the  Crosa .  thc  Hoiy  Spirit 

He  Was  Bishop  here  in  the   year   in  form  of  a  Dove  issuing  from  the  mouth 

1411  \llcq.  Chart. \  and  in  1417.  of  tho  Father  on  the  head  of  the  Son. 

L  n  7         -       u/r      J        i^    i          f  On  each  side  of  the  centre  niche  is  a 

[Cart.  Glasg.]     Murdo,  Duke  of  smaU  recess,  jutting  forward,  in  which  is 

Albany,  Regent  of  the  Kingdom,  a  figure  in  the  act  of  adoration.     Above 

made 'him    Lord    Chancellor    in  these,  in  smaller  canopied  niches  are  two 

.  __     .      .,  „  ,,      -p..  ,  upright  figures  of  Saints ;  at  each  side  is 

1423,  in  the  room  of  the  Bishop  a  Shield>  bearillg  tho  Arms  of  Scotland. 

of  Aberdeen  ;    and  the  Same  year,    In  the  lower  part  of  the  Seal  is  a  three- 

the  9th  Of  AugUSt,  he  Was  liomi-    quarter  front  figure  of  a  Bishop  kneeling, 

.      .  within  an  arched  recess  ;  on  either  side 

liated      first      Commissioner      lor   is  a  Shield,  charged  with  a  Griffin  se<j- 
treating    about    the    Redemption    reant.  Lander's  paternal  Arms.  A.D.  1417 
VOL.  n.  3  B 


•JOS  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

of  Kino-  James  I.,  wliicli  was  at  last  effected  the  next  year, 
1424.  Accordingly,  lie  is  Bishop  and  Chancellor  in  1423 
[Dip].,  c.  05',  and  1424  "Cart.  Glasn.',  and  he  continued  in 
that  Office  until  his  Death  ;  for  he  was  Bishop  here  and  Loixl 
Chancellor  the  14th  da}7  of  April,  in  the  20th  year  of  King  James 
I.  [Cart.  Aberd.  ,  and  William  de  Lander,  Bishop,  was  Dead, 
and  the  See  vacant,  May  10,  1420.  [Cart.  Giant/.] 

This  Bishop  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Vestry  of  the  Cathedral 
Church,  and  huilt  the  great  Steeple  of  Stone  as  far  as  the  first 
Battlement,  where  the  Arms  of  Lander  of  Hatton  are  still  to  Le 
seen  cut  in  stone  in  several  places.  Bishop  Lander  Died  June 
14,  1425.  [Obituary  of  Glasyuir.] 

He  built  the  Crypt  below  the  Chapter  House,  and  the  Steeple, 
with  the  Battlements  of  the  Tower.  '  Preface  <  p.  .r/n'.,  7'<v/. 
J'lpis.  Glas. 

This  Bishop's  parents  were  Robert  and  Anabella  de  Lawedre ; 
and  from  the  Arms  often  repeated  on  the  Cathedral  and  found 
on  his  Seal,  he  must  have  been  of  the  ancient  Family  of  the 
Landers  of  the  Merse.  His  Arms  are  three  Bars  within  an 
Escutcheon,  with  Mitre,  Crozier,  and  the  Badges  of  his  Episcopal 
dignity. 

Crawford  and  Keith  are  mistaken  about  the  parentage  of 
the  Bishop. 

XXIII.  JOHN  CAMERON,     A.D.  1420-40, 

Of  the  Family  of  Lochiel,  was  lirst  Official  of  Lothian  in 
1422.  [C.  PitlL]  He  became  afterwards  Confessor  and  Secre 
tary  to  the  Earl  of  Douglas,  who  presented  him  to  the  Rectory 
of  Cambuslang.  [Ibid.]  He  was  Provost  of  Lincluden  in  1424, 
and  "Magistro  Joanne  Cameron"  is  "secretario  regis"  the  same 
.year.  [It.  Char.,  13.  //.,  N'<>.  5.]  He  is  Keeper  of  the  Great 
Seal,  25th  February  and  7th  March,  1425  '•'Ibid],  and  anno 
1425-0  [Ibid,  B.  //.,'  Xn.  22.;  On  February  25  and  15th  May, 
an.  reg.  20,  he  is  Provost  of  Lincluden,  and  Keeper  of  the  Privy 
Seal  [Ibid],  and  he  is  the  same  in  1430.  [Ibid,  B.  //.,  Xo.  3.' 
He  is  also  Provost  of  Lincluden,  and  Secretary  in  the  twenty- 
first  year  of  the  Reign  of  James  I.  [Ibid.]  In  1420  he  was 


JOHN  CAME  HUN.  i'JU 

Elected  Bishop  of  Glasgow  Jielitj.  Sti.  Kcntiy.',  and  John 
Cameron  is  "electo  ct  coiinrmato  episcopo  Glasguensi,  et  priv. 
sigilli  custode,"  in  1426.  Uc<j.  Chart.]  He  is  also  Bishop  of 
this  See,  and  Lord  Chancellor,  the  twenty-fourth  year  of  King 
James  I.,  and  in  1428,  and  in  1430.  Ibid.]  In  1429,  this 
Bishop  erected  six  Churches  within  his  Diocese,  by  consent  of 
their  respective  Patrons,  into  Prebends,  the  title  of  which  erec 
tion,  as  contained  in  the  Cart.  Glamj.,  is  thus— "Erectio  sex 
ccclesiarum  parocliialium  in  praebendas  ecclesiae  Glasg.  facta 
per  Joannem  Cameron  episcopum  GHasguensem."  The  six 
Churches  were  Cambuslang,  Torbolton,  Eaglesham,  Luss,  Kirk- 
niaho,  and  Killearn.  This  Bishop  also 
fixed  particular  Offices  to  particular 
Churches,  such  as  the  Kector  of  Cambus 
lang  to  be  perpetual  Chancellor  of  the 
Church  of  Glasgow,  the  Hector  of  Carn- 
wath  to  be  Treasurer,  the  Rector  of  Kil- 
bricle  to  be  Chantor,  <tc.  In  1433,  Bishop 
Cameron  was  chosen  one  of  the  Delegates 
from  the  Church  of  Scotland  to  the  Coun-  The  headof  s. 

•i       <•  i>      -i  .      ^i  TIT  i    mitred  and  crowned  with  the 

cil  oi  Jbasii ;  and  accordingly  lie  set  out.  XT.   , 

;  °  -  '  Nimbus,  under  a  rich  Gothic 

With     a     bafe-COllduct    from     the    King    of  canopy,  with  tabernacle  work 

England,  with  a  Retinue  of  no  less  than  at  the  sides.  The  Bust  rests 
thirty  persons  [Officers  of  State,  p.  25,  and  ™  a.sllicld  1sl7°rtod ^  a 

L  •«      •       '  J-          Crozier,  and  bears  three 

Feed.  Any.]  And  as  the  Truce  with  England  jjars.  At  each  side  is  a  Fish 
was  near  to  a  close  on  November  30,  1437,  with  a  llins in  its  mouth- 
Mr.  Rymer  has  published  another  Safe-conduct  for  Ambassadors 
from  Scotland  to  come  into  England  about  Prorogation  of  the 
Peace  ;  and  the  first  named  is  John,  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  Chancel 
lor  of  Scotland.  "R.  Chart.,  B.  it.,  No.  8.  He  was  Bishop  here  in 
1439  'Peerage,  p.  278  ,  in  1440  -Mar.},  in  1444  \E.  Chart.],  and 
Bishop  and  Chancellor  anno  3tio  regis  Jacobi  II.  Ibid.  He  is 
mentioned  in  Charters  of  Donation  and  Confirmation  of  the  Col 
legiate  Church  of  Corstorphin,  founded  by  the  Knights  Forrester, 
1429-44.  Mid-LotJtian  Charters.  Bannatijne  Clul.]  So  it  is 
evident,  from  the  clearest  Vouchers,  that  this  person  remained 
Chancellor  for  the  first  three  years  of  the  Reign  of  King  James 


:>^  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

II.,  contrary  to  what  ;dl  our  Historians  have  written,  which 
affords  a  strong  presumption  that  the  Story  concerning  his 
tragical  end  is  a  mere  fiction.  After  the  Bishop's  removal  from 
the  Chancellor's  Office,  and  so  being  freed  from  public  business, 
he  began  to  build  the  great  Tower  at  his  Episcopal  Palace  in  the 
City  of  Glasgow,  where  his  Coat-Armorial  is  to  be  seen  to  this 
day,  with  Mitre,  Crozier,  and  all  the  Badges  of  the  Episcopal 
dignity.  And  the  forementioned  Writer  of  the  "  Lives  of  the 
Officers  of  State,"  takes  notice  that  he  also  laid  out  a  great  deal 
of  money  in  carrying  on  the  building  of  the  Vestry,  which  was 
begun  by  his  Predecessor,  Bishop  Lander,  where  his  Arms  are 
likewise  to  be  seen  by  the  curious.  But  for  all  the  good  things 
Bishop  Cameron  did,  and,  which  is  strange  (adds  this  Author), 
he  is  as  little  beholden  to  the  charity  of  our  Historians  as  any 
man  in  his  time.  The  learned  Mr.  George  Buchanan,  and  the 
Right  Reverend  Archbishop  Spottiswoode,  from  Mr.  George, 
characterize  the  Bishop  to  have  been  a  very  worldly  kind  of  man, 
and  a  great  Oppressor,  especially  of  his  Vassals  within  the 
Bishopric.  They  toll  us,  moreover,  that  he  made  a  very  fearful 
exit  at  his  Country  Seat  of  Lochwood,  rive  or  six  miles  North- 
East  of  the  City  of  Glasgow,  on  Christmas  Eve  of  the  year  1446 ; 
and  then  this  Gentleman  says — "Indeed  it  is  very  hard  for  me, 
though  I  have  no  particular  attachment  to  Bishop  Cameron,  to 
form  such  a  bad  opinion  of  the  man  from  what  good  things  I 
have  seen  done  by  him,  and  withal,  considering  how  much  he 
was  favoured  and  employed  by  the  best  of  Princes — I  mean  King 
James  II. — and  for  so  long  a  time,  too,  in  the  first  Office  of  the 
State,  and  in  the  second  place  in  the  Church,  especially  since 
good  Mr.  Buchanan  brings  no  Voucher  to  prove  his  assertion ; 
only,  he  says,  it  had  been  delivered  by  others,  and  constantly 
affirmed  to  be  true,  which  amounts  to  be  no  more,  in  my  humble 
opinion,  than  that  he  sets  down  the  Story  upon  no  better 
authority  than  a  mere  hearsay." 

"Ane  thousand  CCCCXLVI,  thai*  clecessit  in  the  Castall  of 
Glasgow,  Master  Jhon  Cameron,  Bischope  of  Glasgow,  upon 
Yule  ewyne,  that  was  Bischope  xix  yer."  "Short  Chronicle  of 
Reign  of  James  II. \ 


HisHO)'  CAMERON'S  AHMS— GHKAT  TOAVEK  <>i-  Eriscoi'Ai-  I-ALACK. 
[Reproduce.!  from  an  original  Pen-nnd-Juk  Sketch  by  John  Hopkirke  in  1752.J 


:'<>2  rasiiors  OF  Tin:  SEE  01;  GLASGOW. 

The  Episcopal  Palace,  or  Castle,  stood  on  the  vacant  space 
in  front  of  the  present  Infirmary,  immediately  South- West  of  the 
Cathedral ;  but  when  or  by  whom   Founded  does  not  appear. 
The  great  Tower,   which  formed  the  principal  portion   of  the 
Building,  was  erected  by  Bishop  Cameron  about  the  year  1430 
;Denham   states  positively  1120',   and  nearly  a  Century   later 
appears  to  have  been  augmented  by  Archbishop  Beaton.     On  this 
Tower,  says  MTre,  the  Historian  of  Glasgow,  "  his  Arms  are  yet 
to  be  seen  (1730)  with  an  Escutcheon,  ensigned  with  his  Crozier 
Pastoral  Staff   behind  the  Shield,  surmounted  of  a  Salmon  Fish, 
the  Badge  of  the  Episcopal  See,  and  his  name  above  in  great 
Saxon  capital  letters."     See  Cut  on  preceding  page.-    The  term 
"  surmounted '' is  probably  a  typographical  error.     Nisbet  gives 
the  Arms  of  this  Prelate,  supported  "  at  the  sides  of  the  Shield" 
by  "  two  Salmons  with  Pangs  in  their  mouths."     Of  the  Palace, 
the  entire  structure  was  built  of  hewn  stone,  and  inclosed  with 
an  embattled  Wall  lo  feet  high  ,Mcuwran<la  ly  Hubert  Had,  7%.  , 
ornamented   at    certain   points    with    the    Arms    of  Archbishop 
Beaton  'Ancient  (did  Modern  I'M  of  Armories,  X inlet,  p.  81',  who 
built  that  addition  about  1510  [Chronicles  uf  S.  Mwiyo,  />.  53 ', 
previous  to  which  the  Castle  was  defended  by  a  Fosse  with  a 
Drawbridge    and    Portcullis     Note*   l/i   Thomas  ./vhnxtcm,    Es<j., 
/•'.N.J.,    Scut.:      The   Wall,   which  was   of  an  irregular   form, 
extended  on  the  West  from  within  some  50  yards  of  the  head  of 
Kirk  Street,  along  the  centre  of  Castle  Street,  to  a  point  on  a 
line  with  the  front   of  the   Infirmary,  where   stood   a   circular 
Tower,  the  remains  of  which,  with  the  steps  of  the  sunk  portion 
(ten  in  number),  were  removed  in  1853.     [Hid.]     The  Northern 
inclosure  was  formed  by  two  Walls  extending  from  the  extremi 
ties  of  the  East  and  WTest  Walls ;   that  from  the  Eastern  in  a 
North-Westerly,  and  that  from  the  Western  in  a  North-Easterly 
direction,  forming  a  right  angle  at  their  junction.     A  cross  Wall, 
proceeding  South-eastward  from  the  termination  of  the  Western 
inclosure,  united  with  the  South-East  Wall,  nearly  opposite  the 
head  of  Kirk  Street,  where  stood  a  high  Tower,  quadrangular 
and   embattled,   and  surmounted  at  each  Gable  by  a  flight  of 
steps,  from  the   outer  angles  of  which  projected  a  species   of 


JOHN  CAMERON. 


503 


Turret.  In  front  of  the  angle  formed  by  the  junction  of  the  West 
and  South-West  Walls  was  constructed  a  Bastion.  At  the 
extremity  of  the  South-East  Wall  (which  formed  a  slight  angle 
inwards  at  the  centre),  fronting  the  South-East,  and  uniting  with 
the  East  Wall  immediately  Southward  of  the  Consistorial  House 
formerly  attached  to  the  Cathedral,  was  situated  the  main 
Entrance  or  Gatehouse.  Donholm,  in  his  "  History  of  Glasgow," 


l.ATEHOrsK    Of     THE    AUC1I  L-Kl'lsC'  ll'AL     1'AI.AOK. 

[Sketched  by  .T.  Hojikirkc  in  1";VJ.J 

appears  to  have  confounded  the  ruins  of  this  "  Gatehouse"  with 
the  remains  of  the  Castle  Gate,  one  of  the  City  Ports.  The 
Gatehouse,  the  Gables  of  which  terminated  at  the  Roof  in  a 
flight  of  crow-steps,  was  of  a  square  form,  and  displayed  an  em 
battled  front,  flanked  by  two  Circular  Towers,  and  each  of  these 
contained  an  upright  oblong  Compartment.  The  Parapets  were 
supported  by  a  double  row  of  die-shaped  Corbels,  the  under 
tier  of  which,  according  to  the  prevailing  custom,  was  machi- 


r.OJ  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

colatcd  for  the  purposes  of  defence.  This  portion  of  the  Edifice 
was  erected  during  the  Episcopate  of  Archbishop  Dunbar,  between 
1524  and  1547  ;  and  its  construction  has  hitherto  been  attributed 
exclusively  to  that  Prelate.  There  is  no  contemporary  Document 
to  authenticate  this  statement.  The  circumstance  could  scarcely 
have  escaped  the  research  of  the  Author  of  ''  Origines  Parochiales 
Scoti.r,"  who  has  recorded  the  Architectural  achievements  of 
others  of  S.  Mungo's  Hierarchy.  If  for  the  statement  there  be 
no  higher  authority  than  the  occurrence  of  the  Archbishop's  Coat 
Armorial,  tin*  presence  of  the  Insignia  of  the  Sub-Dean,  with 
which  it  is  conjoined,  must  he  held  as  equally  potent  in  sup 
porting  the  claim  of  the  latter  to  a  share  in  its  erection. 

Extending  in  front  of  the  Castle  Wall,  on  the  South-East, 
was  the  ancient  Avenue  leading  to  the  Cathedral.  This  road, 
which  presented  appearances  of  great  age,  was  constructed  of 
small  pieces  of  trap  rock  firmly  embedded  in  some  substance  as 
a  kind  of  mortar  [Pr'tcate  Memoranda  lij  llciil ,  which  had  acquired 
the  consistency  of  solid  rock.  Up  to  the  period  of  its  removal  it 
was  not  known  to  have  undergone  repair,  whence  probably  arose 
the  popular  notion  referring  its  formation  to  the  period  of  Roman 
occupation.  It  is  now  generally  supposed  to  have  been  the  work 
of  the  first  Archbishop  Beaton,  who  inclosed  the  Palace  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Sixteenth  Century. 

Notice  of  the  "Bishop's  Garden"  is  found  about  the  year 
12G8,  but  no  mention  of  the  Castle  till  A.D.  121)0,  and  then  only 
incidental.  "7.V//.  Glut.,  p.  177;  Or'uj.  Parocli.  In  1300  the 
Castle  of  Glasgow  was  placed  under  an  English  Garrison,  for  the 
purpose,  among  others,  of  maintaining  the  supremacy  of  Anthony 
Bee,  an  obnoxious  Ecclesiastic,  thrust  into  the  See  of  Glasgow 
by  Edward  I.  [Stuart's  Vieics  anil  Notices  of  Glasgow  in  former 
Times. ],  This  event  probably  took  place  in  1301.  In  1300  Bee 
appears  to  have  been  a  Prelate  of  the  See  of  Durham.  Subse 
quently  to  this,  for  the  period  of  two  Centuries,  no  farther  notice 
of  this  Structure  is  met  with,  till,  in  1517,  when  judgment  in  an 
Action,  raised  at  the  instance  of  "  ane  maist  reverend  Fader  in 
God,  James,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,"  is  recorded  against  John 
Mure  of  Caldwell  [Books  of  Council,  roL  .rx.r.,fol.  210;  Descrip. 


JOHN  CAMEEON.  505 

of  Lanark,  Append],  "for  tlie  wrangwis  and  violent  ejection  and 
furthputting  of  his  servancls   out  of  liis  Castell  and  Palice   of 
Glasgow,  and  taking  the  samyn  fra  them,  the  xx  day  of  Februar, 
the   yer  of  God  J'»V  and  XV  zers,"  and  for  the  "wrangwis 
destructioun  of  his  said  Castell  and  Place,  hreking  down  of  the 
saymin  with  artalzary."    "  The  qnhilks  Castell "  "  was  spulzeit" 
"be  the  said  Johmie  Mure"  "and  his  complices;  Lyk  as  was 
clerly  previt  hefor  the"  "  Lordis  of  Counsale,"  who  "  ordannis 
lettres  to  be  direct  to  compell  and  destreuzie  the  said  Johune 
Mure,   his  lands  and  guds  tharfor."     In   1517,  the   Castle  of 
Glasgow  was  invested  by  John,  Earl  of  Lennox,  who  had  joined 
issue  with  Hume  and  the  Earl  of  Arran,  in  defying  the  power  of 
the  Regent,  John,  Duke  of  Albany,  on  which  occasion  it  was 
recovered  by  the  latter  with  inconsiderable  loss,  retribution  falling 
on  a  French  gunner,  a  deserter,  who  had  aided  in  its  defence! 
[Buchanan's  History,  Edit.  1752,  p.  137;  DmmmomVs  History, 
p.  251.;     Between  the  years  1543  and  1545,  it  was  fortified  by 
Mathew,   Earl  of  Lennox,   to   resist  the  forces  of  the  Eogcnt 
Arran,  raised  at  the  instigation  of  Cardinal  Beaton.    [Buchanan's 
History,  Edit.  1752,  p.  103.]     For  ten  days  it  appears  to  have 
been  "battered"  with  "brass  guns,"  when  the  Garrison  sur 
rendered  "upon  quarter  and  indemnity,"  but  were  put  to  death. 
In  1553,  "  the  inner  Flower  Garden  beside  the  Palace"  was  the 
scene   of  an  interview  between  the  Archbishop   and   "Andrew 
Hamyltoun  of  Coclmoch,  Provost,  and  the  whole  Council,"  where 
the  former,  "  engaged  in  conversation  with  several  Canons  of  the 
Chapter,"  was  presented  with  "  a  Schedule  of  Paper,"  containing 
the  names  of  certain  of  the  most  worthy  and  substantial  men  of  the 
City,  from  whom  the  Archbishop  selected  the  Bailies  for  the  fol 
lowing  year."    [ Oria.  Par.  Scot.,  p.  13.]    Previous  to  the  general 
Outburst  in  1500,  Archbishop  Beaton  summoned  to  the  defence 
of  the  Castle  the  Nobility  and  Barons  of  Clydesdale,  who  adhered 
to  the  old  Faith  [M'Ure's  Hist,  of  Glasy.,  p.  38],  aided  by  whom, 
with  a  party  of  French  soldiers,  he  succeeded  in  dislodging  the 
emissaries  of  the  Duke  of  Chatelherault,  who  had  taken  forcible 
possession.     On  the  flight  of  Beaton  at  the  Reformation,   the 
Castle  of  Glasgow  was  again  seized  by  the  Duke  [Orig.  Par.  Scot., 

VOL.  II.  3  S 


GOG  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

p.  7  ,  who  was  eventually  compelled  to  deliver  it  up  to  the  Earl 
of  Lennox.  The  Lordship  of  the  Archbishop's  Castle,  according 
to  Brown,  came  to  the  Family  of  Lennox  in  virtue  of  a  transac 
tion  with  a  Priest  of  the  name  of  Montgomery  (Preferred  to  the 
Archbishopric  through  the  agency  of  the  Duke  do  Aubignr),  who, 
for  the  annual  payment  of  £1000  (Scots),  some  Horse-Corn,  and 
Poultry,  transferred  to  his  Patron,  his  Heirs  and  Successors,  the 
whole  Revenues  belonging  to  the  See.  "JJixt.  (Uasy.,  p.  36.'  It 
is  recorded  of  this  Prelate,  the  last  of  the  Romish  Hierarchy  who 
held  the  See  of  Glasgow,  that,  having  plundered  the  Sec  of  its 
Golden  Ornaments  and  Vestments,  he  despoiled  the  Cathedral 
Archives  of  all  its  valuable  Records,  retiring  with  them  into 
France.  Some  of  these,  through  the  well-directed  efforts  of  the 
Abbu  M'Pherson,  a  Member  of  the  Scottish  College  at  Paris, 
within  which  they  had  been  deposited,  were  recovered  at  the 
French  Revolution.  The  ancient  Chartulary,  in  two  Volumes, 
and  other  valuable  MSS.,  are  Printed  for  the  Bannatyne  and 
Maitland  Clubs.  Beaton,  who,  after  his  Deprivation,  had  served 
in  the  capacity  of  Scotch  Ambassador  to  the  Court  of  France, 
was  restored  by  Act  of  Parliament  to  the  Temporalities  of  the 
See  of  Glasgow,  which,  without  its  Immunities,  he  enjoyed  till 
his  Death  in  1G03.  In  1571,  says  Buchanan,  "The  Hamil- 
tonians"  went  to  Glasgow,  resolving  to  demolish  the  Castle  of 
the  Archbishop  there,  that  it  might  not  be  a  receptacle  to  the 
Earl  of  Lennox,  then  returned  out  of  England.  The  Castle  at 
this  time  appears  to  have  been  garrisoned  by  "  a  few  raw  soldiers 
(24  in  number),  unprovided  of  necessaries,"  and  the  Governor 
absent.  "Hearing,  however,"  of  "  a  design  speedily  to  relieve 
the  Castle,"  "the  Hamiltonians "  raised  their  siege,  and  "in 
great  fear  packed  away."  [7>m\  ///'.sf.  of  Scot.,  p.  405.]  The 
Bishop's  Palace  was  restored  in  1611,  during  the  Episcopate 
of  Archbishop  Spottiswoode.  [Chalmers's  Caledonia,  p.  629.  i 
It  is  stated  by  James  Barns,  a  Glasgow  Bailie,  and  Chronicler 
of  the  middle  of  the  Seventeenth  Century,  whose  "Memoirs," 
in  MS. — [a  Transcript ;  since  Edited  and  Printed  by  Mr.  Maid- 
ment,  Advocate] — are  preserved  in  the  Advocates'  Library, 
Edinburgh,  that  in  August,  1654,  for  four  days,  were  detained 


JOliX  CAiiEEON.  507 

prisoners  in  the  Castle  of  Glasgow,  preparatory  to  their  being 
:=ent  to  Edinburgh,  Colonel  Robert  Montgomery,  son  of  the  Earl 
of  Eglinton,  and  fourteen  men  apprehended  with  him  at  Kilmar- 
nock.  'Memoranda  !>//  Hubert  llcid,  Esq.]  "The  Castle  of 
Glasgow"  is  noticed  by  Hamilton  of  Wishaw,  in  his  "Descrip 
tion  of  the  Sheriffdom  of  Lanark,"  as  "the  ancient  Seat  of  the 
Archbishop  of  this  Sea,  built  of  polisht  stone,  and  vet  in  good 
condition;"  by  Slezer,  the  unfortunate  Dutch  Captain  of  Artil 
lery,  as  "fenced  with  an  exceeding  high  "Wall  of  hewn  stone," 
looking  "  down  upon  the  City  ;"  by  Eae;  in  1G61— cited  by  the 
Author  of  the  "  Chronicles  of  S.  Muugo"— as  li  a  goodly  Building 
near  the  Church,"  "  still  preserved;"  and  in  Morer's  Account  of 
Scotland  (1C89),  as  "  without  doubt  a  very  magnificent  structure, 
but  now  in  ruins,  and"  "  no  more  left  in  repair  than  what  was  the 
ancient  Prison,  and  is  at  this  time  a  mean  dwelling."  (Probably 
the  square  Tower  erected  by  Beaton,  and  contiguous  Building.) 
Defoe,  writing  in  1727,  calls  it  "a  ruinous  Castle,"  and  repeats 
the  remark  of  Slezer,  alluding  to  its  inclosure  by  an  "  exceeding 
high  Wall."  The  Date  1C 80  obviously  points  to  the  tumults 
consequent  on  the  abolition  of  "Episcopacy,"  during  which  the 
Castle  appears  to  have  been  partially  demolished.  About  this 
time  it  became  the  property  of  the  Crown;  and,  in  1715,  was 
used  as  a  temporary  Prison  for  upwards  of  300  Highlanders, 
taken  during  the  Rebellion.  [Stuart's  1'ieirs,  <(-c.]  At  length, 
neglected  and  in  ruins,  the  whole  Structure,  with  the  Castle-yard 
and  Garden,  were  in  1701  granted  by  the  King  for  the  purpose 
of  erecting  the  present  Infirmary.  - 

"In  ancient  times,"  says  M'Ure,  "all  or  most  of  the  City 
was  built  near  the  Episcopal  Palace,  or  Bishop's  Castle."  This 
consisted  of  the  "  Kirkgate,'' the  "High  Street,"  the  "  Drygate," 
and  "  Rotten  Row,"  in  which,  "  near  the  Castle,"  was  held  "  the 
twenty  day  of  Yuill,  or  S.  Mungo's  Fair."  West  of  the  quad 
rangular  Wall- Tower  constructed  by  Archbishop  Beaton,  "near 
the  Bishop's  Palace  and  Castle/'  stood  the  "Hospital  of  S. 
Nicholas,  or  Almshouse,"  said  to  have  been  founded  by  "Bishop 
Andrew  Muirhead,  1455-73."  [Orig.  Par.  Scot.] 

During  operations  for  removing  the  Mound  in  front  of  the 


50S  BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Infirmary,  so  recently  as  the  year  1853,  traces  of  the  ancient 
Ditch  which  surrounded  the  Castle  were  visible  in  a  dark- 
coloured  incrustation,  evidently  formed  by  the  feculent  deposit 
usually  found  at  the  bottom  of  stagnant  water.  [Notes  %  Thos. 
Johnston,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  Scot.]  At  the  same  time  were  found  the 
ancient  Drawbridge,  consisting  of  twelve  beams  of  oak,  pegged 
together,  of  the  length  of  15  feet ;  at  the  point  formerly  occupied 
by  the  Gatehouse,  four  oak  piles,  4  feet  in  length,  and  15  inches 
broad  either  way;  several  Cannon  Balls,  weighing  each  36  Ibs.; 
a  few  Silver  Coins;  remains  of  an  Ash-Pit,  containing  several 
lambs'  skulls,  and  some  oyster  shells ;  the  Stone  used  in  fixing 
the  Gallows  during  the  execution  of  Criminals  within  the  Castle- 
yard  ;  and  a  portion  of  a  human  cranium.  [Ibid.]  Some 
remains  of  the  Bastion  constructed  by  Archbishop  Beaton,  dis 
covered  near  the  head  of  Kirk  Street,  had  become  so  consolidated 
as  to  require  the  process  of  blasting  to  effect  its  removal. 
[Iltiil.  Fragments  of  the  Palace,  and  some  Steps  taken  from  the 
circular  Staircase  of  the  great  Tower,  the  latter  having  been 
converted  into  flat  Tombstones,  are  still  distinguishable  within 
the  Cathedral  Yard.  [J.  C.  Roger's  Paper.  Soc.  Antiq.  Scot.} 

XXIV.  JAMES  BRUCE,     A.D.  1446-7, 

Son  of  Sir  Robert  Bruce  of  Clackmannan,  was  the  next 
Bishop  of  this  See.  His  first  OfEce  in  the  Church  was  the 
Rectory  of  Kilmany,  in  Fife,  about  1438.  J////.J  He  was 
Consecrated  Bishop  of  Dunkeld  at  Dunfermline,  "Dominica  in 
septuagesima,"  or  4th  February,  1441.  [Ibid.  In  1444,  he 
became  Lord- Chancellor  of  Scotland ;  and  as  he  had  been  greatly 
insulted  in  his  Bishopric  of  Dunkeld  by  one  Robert  Reoch  Mac- 
donachy  (i.e.,  the  Family  of  the  now  Strowan  Robertson),  he  is 
said  to  have  been  weary  of  that  See ;  and  so,  upon  the  death  of 
Bishop  Cameron,  he  was  Translated  to  the  See  of  Glasgow ;  but 
before  the  necessary  Forms  were  despatched,  death  took  him  off 
the  stage  of  life.  [Fordun.]  The  See  of  Glasgow  was  still 
vacant  the  4th  October,  1447,  after  the  death  of  Bishop  Cameron. 
[Cart.  Glasg.]  He  Died  before  Confirmation  or  Investiture. 


WILLIAM  TUBNBULL.  juo 

XXV.  WILLIAM  TUBNBULL,     A.D.  1448-54, 

A  son  of  the  Family  of  Beclrule,  in  the  County  of  Roxburgh. 
He  was  first  a  Prebendary  of  Glasgow,  and  afterwards  Doctor  of 
Laws,  and  Archdeacon  of  St.  Andrews  within  the  bounds  of 
Lothian,  a  Privy  Councillor,  and  Keeper  of  the  Privy  Seal.  He 
is  styled  "William  de  Turnbull,  Domino  praebendae  privati 
sigilli  custode,"  in  1441.  ."%.  Chart.]  He  became  Bishop  of 
Glasgow  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1448,  and  received  Conse 
cration  in  the  month  of  April.  "In  that  saym  yer  (1449) 
Master  William  Turnbill  said  his  first  Mess  in  Glasgue  the  20th 
clay  of  September."  [Aiichinleck  Citron.]  Accordingly,  we  find 
William  was  Bishop  in  1449,  1452,  and  1453  [Keg.  Chart.},  1450 
and  1451  '  C.  Duiifrrm.],  1451  [C.  Pallet.],  1452  [Fordun  and  Cart. 
Mor.],  1453  'Hay  from  Cart,  of  S.  Giles];  and  William  is  Bishop 
in  1449,  1450,  and  1453,  under  the  Surname  of  William  Turn- 
bull  [Cart.  Glaxij.  ,  and  [Hi d\  the  King  says—"  Nostro  consiliario 
et  consanguineo,  pro  cordiali  affectione  et  singular!  favore,  quern 
erga  ipsum  gerimus,  et  pro  suo  fideli  cousilio,  ct  gratuitis  servi- 
tiis  uobis  multipliciter  impensis,"  anno  Dom.  1449,  et  reg.  14. 
The  City  and  Barony  of  Glasgow  were,  in  1450,  granted  to  the 
Bishop  and  his  Successors,  blanch  for  a  red  rose.  [Scotstarvit's 
Calendars.  M.]  In  1452,  or  1453,  he  procured  a  Bull  from 
Pope  Nicholas  V.  for  erecting  a  College  for  Literature  within  the 
City  of  Glasgow ;  after  the  complete  settlement  of  which  noble 
Monument  of  his  care  for  the  cultivating  of  learning,  it  seems  he 
took  a  journey  to  Rome,  where  lie  Died  on  the  3rd  September, 
1454 — 3rd  December,  1456,  according  to  the  Chronicle  of  King 
James  II.,  apparently  a  Contemporary  Record. 

"  Item,  in  that  samyn  yer  (1449),  Master  William  Turnbill 
said  his  first  Mess  in  Glasgow  the  xx  day  of  September. 

"That  samyn  yer  (MCCCCLI),  the  Privilege  of  the  Universite 
of  Glasgow  come  to  Glasgow  throw  the  instance  of  King  James 
the  Secund,  and  throw  instigaciouu  of  Master  William  Turnbull, 
that  tyme  Bischop  of  Glasgow,  and  was  proclamit  at  the  Croce 
of  Glasgow,  on  the  Trinite  Sonday,  the  xx  day  of  June.  And 
on  the  morne  thar  war  cryit  ane  gret  Indulgence  gevin  to  Glas- 


510 


BISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OE  GLASGOW. 


giMY.  Lit  the  request  of  thaim  ibrsaid,  be  Pap  Nycholas,  as  it  war 
the  yer  of  grace,  and  with  all  luclulgens  that  thai  mycht  haf  in 
Home,  contcnand  iiii  monethis,  begynnand  the  ix  day  of  Jnlii, 
and  dnrand  to  the  x  day  of  November. 

"  The  saniyn  yer,  the  third  day  of  December,  thai*  decesit  in 
Glasgow,  Master  William  Timibull,  Bischope  of  Glasgow,  that 
broclit  haim  the  pcrdoun  of  it."  "Short  Chronicle  of  the  Eeifjn-  of 

11. 


XXVI.  AXDKEW  MUIRHEAD,     A.D.  1455-73, 

A  son  of  the  Family  of  Lachop,  in  the  Shire  of  Lanark,  a 
man  noted  for  learning  and  piety,  was  first  Rector  of  Cadzow 

(now  Hamilton),  and  then  next  was  Pre 
ferred  to  this  See.  We  find  him  Bishop 
here  in  1456  \Cnrt.  Glasy.  ,  in  1461)  \liiu. 
Alcrd.  ,  in  1451),  '•  et  consecrationis 
quarto ;"  item  1452,  1463,  1465,  1467, 
1470,  and  1473.  ll.y.  Chart.]  He  is 
mentioned  in  the  Register  of  Charters 
of  the  Collegiate  Churches  of  Mid- 
Lothian,  Printed  by  the  Bannatvne 
itllCan°-  Club ;  in  a  Bull  of  Pope  Pius  II.  to  the 
Hospital  of  Soltre,  1461-2 ;  and  in  the 
Confirmation  of  the  Foundation  of  Trini 
ty  Church,  Edinburgh,  and  of  the  Poor 

month;  in  the  « nen  space  at  Hospital,  near  Edinburgh,  1462.  Upon 
each  side  a  Fish,  with  iiing  in  the  Death  of  King  James  II.  in  1460, 

its  mouth.     In  the  lower  part    ,-t  •     -r>-  i  T  PUTT 

»f  the  Seal  is  a  shield,  bear-  tllls  Bishop  was  named  one  of  the  Lords 
on  a  ]>end  three  Acorns,  the  of  the  Regency  during  the  young  King's 
Arms  of  Mini-head.  A.I..  14C.5.  llouage<  He  was  one  of  the  Coiumis- 

i  Metros  Charters.']  .  ,  .       -,-,      ,       -.    .      _,  .  _  _ 

sioners  who  went  to  England  m  1462, 

in  order  to  negotiate  a  Truce  between  the  two  Nations  [Bymer], 
which  was  effected  at  the  City  of  York,  19th  December,  same 
year — 9th  December  [Fcrdera,  vol.  xi.,  p.  311],  but  the  names  of 
the  Ambassadors  are  not  mentioned.  Again,  in  1468,  this 
Bishop,  with  some  others,  were  sent  into  Denmark  to  treat 


py  and  open  Tabernacle  work 
at  the  .-ides.  A  figure  of  S. 
Kentifjeni,  with  the  Nimbus, 
and  vested,  holding  in  his  right 

hand  a  Fish  v-ith!  Kin  in  its 


JOHN  LAIXG. 


511 


about  a  Marriage  between  our  King  and  a  daughter  of  that 
Crown,  which  Commission  had  likewise  a  good  effect  [Tor/aeus]  ; 
and  again,  in  1472,  he  went,  with  others,  in  a  Commission  to 
cultivate  a  farther  Prorogation  of  Truce  with  the  Kingdom  of 
England,  which  they  also  settled.  [Eijiner.]  This  Bishop 
founded  the  Vicars  of  the  Choir,  a  settlement  which  had  not 
been  in  the  Church  before,  "  Fundator  vicarior,  clioiri  in  ecclesia 
Glasguen."  Curl.  (Ihtxg.,  and  Nisb.  Herald.,  vol.  //.,  Appendix, 
]>.  261."  Ho  also  adorned  and  beautified  the  Cathedral,  in  which, 
on  the  North  side  of  the  Nave,  on  the  Roof,  is  still  to  be  seen 
his  Coat  of  Arms,  and  adorned  with  a  Mitre,  exquisitely  graved. 
\Ibid.'  In  1471,  he  founded,  near  to  the  precinct  of  his  Epis 
copal  Palace  at  Glasgow,  an  Hospital,  which  he  Dedicated  to  the 
honour  of  S.  Nicholas,  and  upon  the  Front,  over  the  Door,  are 
the  Bishop's  Arms.  The  Hospital 
had  Endowments  for  twelve  old  Men, 
and  a  Priest  to  perform  Divine  Service 
at  the  Hours  of  Canonical  Devotion. 
[Ibid.]  He  Died  20th  November,  1473. 
[Obituary  Glasfj.' 


XXVII.  JOHN  LAIXG,  A.D.  1474-82, 

Of  the  Family  of  Redhouse,  in  the 
Shire  of  Edinburgh,  was  first  Rector 
of  Tamiadice,  in  the  Shire  of  Angus, 
and  Vicar  of  Linlithgow,  and  was  next 
Preferred  to  the  Office  of  High  Trea 
surer  in  14G5  [Officers  of  State,  p.  ! 
which  last  Office  he  held  till  14G8, 
at  which  time  he  was  made  Lord 
Register,  and  about  this  period  he 
enjoyed  the  Rectories  of  Sutliet  and 
Newlands.  Again,  in  1471,  he  was 
replaced  in  the  Treasury,  which  high 
Office  he  kept  till  1474,  when  he  was 
now,  by  the  King's  special  recom- 


Thrcc  Gothic  niches :  within 
the  centre  one  a  figure  of  S.  Ken- 
tigern,  holding  the  Fish  and  Pang 
in  his  hand;  in  the  dexter  nichu 
is  a  figure  (perhaps  S.  Miehael), 
with  a  long  Spear,  which  he 
thrusts  into  the  head  of  a  man 
beneath  his  feet ;  in  the  sinister 
niche  is  a  figure  of  S.  Catherine, 
crowned  with  the  Nimbus,  hold 
ing  in  her  right  hand  the  Wheel. 
In  the  lower  part  of  the  Seal  is  a 
Shield,  supported  by  two  Angels. 
Quarterly— first  and  fourth,  a 
Tale ;  second  and  third,  three 
Piles,  for  Laing.  A.U.  1477. 
\Glasgou*  College  Charters^ 


512  AKCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

mendation,  Promoted  to  the  Episcopal  See  of  Glasgow.  John 
Laing  is  Elect  of  Glasgow,  and  Treasurer  in  1473-4.  It. 
Chart.]  His  accounts  as  King's  Treasurer  are  taken  off,  Decem 
ber  2,  1474.  [Cart.  Glasa.]  He  was  Bishop  in  1476  and  1478 
[11.  Chart.],  also  27th  July,  1479.  [C.  Arbr.  In  1473,  this 
Bishop  showed  himself  so  good  an  instrument  in  reconciling  the 
King  and  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Albany ;  and  the  King,  it 
seems,  was  so  well  pleased  with,  and  mindful  of  that  piece  of 
seryice,  that,  when  that  Office  came  to  be  vacant  in  the  end 
of  the  year  1482,  he  constituted  him  Lord  High  Chancellor; 
and  so  we  find  him  Bishop  and  Chancellor,  November  1C,  1482. 
[11.  Chart.  _  But  before  he  had  enjoyed  that  Office  full  six 
months,  he  Died  on  the  llth  of  January,  1482-3.  'Orficers  of 
State,  and  Chart.  Pull,  and  Obituary  of  Glasnoic." 

XXVIII.  GEORGE  CAKMICIIAEL,     Elect,     A.D.  1482-8, 

A  son  of  the  Family  of  Carmichael,  in  the  Shire  of  Lanark,  was  Elected 
Bishop  of  Glasgow,  being  then  Treasurer  of  this  See,  as  Hector  of  Carn- 
watli.  But  he  Died  before  his  Consecration,  in  1483.  [Charta  Jacolii  ]><»uir 
ile  liossij,  1488,  Ciean/i/i  elecio  (ildM/neii.]  He  is  also  Elect  of  Glasgow,  18th 
March,  1482-3,  [II.  Clmrt.],  and  "  Elcctus  Glasguensis"  sits  in  the  Parlia 
ment,  the  24th  February  and  1st  March,  1482-3;  the  27th  June,  1483;  and 
the  24th  February,  1483-4.  So  the  Lolls  are  marked. 

XXIX.  ROBERT  BLACADER,     A.D.  1484-1508, 

The  son  of  Sir  Patrick  Blacader  of  Tulliallan,  by  Elizabeth, 
his  wife,  one  of  the  daughters  and  co-heirs  of  Sir  James 
Edmondstonc  of  that  Ilk,  was  first  a  Prebendary  of  Glasgow,  and 
Rector  of  Cardross.  [Cart.  Glasy.]  He  was  Translated  from  the 
See  of  Aberdeen  to  Glasgow  in  1484.  He  was  Bishop  here  in 
1484-5  [Hay's  MS.],  1485  and  1491  [Inv.  Aberd.\  1486,  1487, 
1488,  1494,  1495,  1499  [C.  Paslct],  August  12,  1489,  and 
August  31,  1490.  [Mar.] 

In  January,  1484,  Bishop  Robert  raised  an  action  before  the 
Lords  of  the  Council  against  Archibald,  Earl  of  Angus,  for  intro- 
metting  with  and  having  taken  up  the  mallis,  profits,  and  dewties 
of  the  Barony  of  Castelearis,  at  Whitsunday  and  Martinmas 


EOBEET  BLACADER. 


513 


bypast.  Evidence  having  been  led,  the  Earl  was  ordained  to  pay 
£45  for  the  mallis  of  these  two  Terms,  which  it  was  proved  he 
had  uplifted.  [Act.  Dom.  Con.,  95*,  111*.]  This  was  not,  how 
ever,  the  only  invasion  of  the  Episcopal  Lands  of  Carstairs  which 
occurred  about  that  time.  It  would  appear  that  among  his  other 
agricultural  speculations,  Sir  John  Ross  of  Montgrenane  had 
taken  from  the  Bishop  a  Tack  of  the  Lands  of  Byeflat.  The 
Lords  Somerville  seem  to  have  had  some  claim  to  the  possession 
of  these,  which  they  proceeded  to  enforce  by  the  strong  hand. 
In  consequence,  Sir  John  obtained,  on  the  3rd  of  February,  a 
Decree  of  the  Council  against  John,  Lord  Somerville,  and  Johne, 
his  son,  "for  the  wrongous  spoliation  of  G  oxiu,  price  of  the 
pece,  40« ;  5  kye,  price  of  the  pece, 
30s  ;  GO  of  bollis  of  aits,  price  of  the 
boll,  5s;  10  bollis  of  ber,  price  of  the 
boll,  10s ;  7  score  thrafes  of  fodder, 
price  £3  10s ;  4  score  of  fudderis  of 
hay,  price  of  the  fudder,  Gs  8d ;  and 
for  the  wrangwis  laboring  and  occu- 
pacioun  of  the  Lands  of  Eyeflat  and 
Schaddeshill,  and  spoliacioun  of  the 
proffittis  of  the  cornes,  girss,  and  hay 
of  the  samyn,  extending  to  4  chalders  A  fiffure  of  s.  Kentigem,  vested, 

Of  aits,  20  boll  Of  bere,  200  turses  of   with  Fish  and  Ring  in  its  mouth ; 

hay,  60  of  stanis  of  chese  ;  for  the  in  the  lower  part  is  a  Shield' bcar" 

,,     .  ing  on   a    Chevron   three    Roses, 

SOmeZ  Of  girSS,  £3— extending  to  the    tho  Arms  of  Blacader;   above  the 

some  of  ,£40,  and  mair,  of  a  zere.  Shield  a  Mitre.  A.D.  1491.  [Qias- 
And  for  a  hors  that  was  slane,  £10 ;  tjow  cdlc(je  Chf"'tersl 
and  for  the  distrucciou  and  tinsale  of  uther  twa  hors,  uther  £10 ; 
and  for  5  young  nolt  that  was  destroyit  by  thaim,  50s."  [Ibid, 
107*.]  The  Somervilles,  however,  still  maintained  their  right 
in  spite  of  this  Decree ;  and  the  Dispute  was  not  settled  till 
February,  1488,  when  Lord  Somerville  and  his  son  on  the  one 
part,  and  Bishop  Eobert  on  the  other,  agreed  to  refer  to  arbi 
tration  "  the  question  betwixt  them  for  the  taking  of  the  goods  of 
Eiflate."  [Ibid,  106.] 

John  Knox,   wrhose  Chronology  is  far  from  accurate,  says 


VOL.  II. 


614 


AKCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 


that,  in  1494,  the  sixth  year  of  the  Reign  of  James  IV.,  many 
persons,  called  Lolards  of  Kyle,  were  summoned  before  the  King 
in  Council,  by  Blackader,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow.  Among  them 
were  the  Campbells  of  Cessnock  and  Newmilns ;  Read  of  Bar- 
skomming;  Shaw  of  Polkemac;  Ladies  Stair  and  Pokellie ;  Helen 
and  Isobel  Chalmers.  He  narrates  the  charges  at  length,  and 
the  articles  are  generally  directed  against  the  Papal  Abuses. 
The  magnanimity  of  James  treated  the  affair  with  due  contempt, 
and  it  expired  in  a  torrent  of  ridicule  against  the  Archbishop- 
Read,  one  of  the  accused,  being  a  man  of  firm  mind  and  facetious 
repartee.  [Pinker  ton.] 

Robert  is  Bishop  in  149G. 
\Cart.  Cambusk.]  He  has  the 
Title  of  Archbishop  of  Glas 
gow  in  1500  [Cart.  PasL],  as 
he  has  also  January  22, 1500. 
[Clackmannan.]  Inl50G,  the 
Archbishop  of  Glasgow  an 
nexed  the  Vicarage  of  Lin- 
toun,  and  the  Vicarage  of 
Stobo,  and  the  Vicarage  of 
Kilbirnie,  and  the  Vicarage 
of  Cadder,  to  the  College  of 
Glasgow.  [Mun.  Aim.  Uni- 

A  figure  of  S.  Kentigem,  with  the  Nimbus,  rer'  GlaSV'>  ?'  42'^      In  1508' 

and  habited  as  a  Monk,  his  hands  holding  a  he    founded    a    Chaplainry  ill 

Book  on  his  breast ;  at  his  left  side  is  a  Fish,  the  Church   called    S.  Mary's 

with  a  Gemmed  Ring  in  his  mouth,  within  a  f  ^r  n             •      ,  i       ™     •  i       f 

Gothic  niche.     In  the  lower  part  is  a  Shield,  °f    ™  e*bent>  m  the  Pansh  °f 

bearing  the  Arms  of  Blacadcr,  as  in  the  last,  Carstail'S,     which     had     been 

and  above  it  a  Cross  Fleury.      A.D.   1500.  built  and  repaired  at  his  OW11 

[Ulast/ow  College  Charters]  T.    *• 

charge.    Jrom  a  remote  Date 

there  was  at  Carstairs  a  Residence  of  the  Bishops  of  Glasgow. 
[Orig.  Paroch,  vol.  /.,  p.  124.1  Archbishop  Robert  of  Glasgow 
founded,  in  1507,  a  Chaplainry  in  the  Church  called  that  of 
the  "  Blessed  Mary  de  Weebent,  in  the  Parish  of  Casteltarris, 
which  had  been  constructed  and  repaired  at  his  charge  and 
expense,"  and  endowed  it  with  an  annuity  of  40  Shillings,  which 


ROBERT  BLACADER.  515 

he  had  acquired  from  George  Gilmour,  and  any  excess  that  there 
might  be  of  the  lesser  Customs  of  Glasgow  over  the  sum  of  38 
Merks ;  while  to  prevent  this  and  two  other  Foundations  of  his 
being  injured  by  his  Successors,  he,  at  his  own  expense,  con 
structed  and  repaired  a  Fulling  Mill  on  the  Kelvine,  for  which  a 
Feu-Duty  of  6  Merks  annually  would  be  paid  to  him  and  his 
Successors.  [Reg.  Glasg.,  p.  519,  486.]  Robert  was  still  Bishop 
here  in  1507,  in  the  fourth  year  of  Pope  Julius  II.  [Cart. 
Cambusk.]  This  Bishop  had  so  much  favour  at  Rome,  that  he 
obtained  from  the  Pope  the  See  of  Glasgow  to  be  erected  into  an 
Archbishopric,  whose  Suffragans  were  appointed  the  Diocesans 
of  Dunkeld,  Dunblane,  Galloway,  and  Argyle  [Cart.  Glasg.],  yet 
in  the  original  erection  by  Pope  Innocent  VIII.  in  1391,  Pontifi- 
catus  8vo,  expressly  calls  the  present  Bishop  of  Glasgow, 
William.  [Ibid.] 

Riddle,  in  his  MS.  Notes,  under  Date  8th  October,  1501, 
says — There  are  two  Commissions  under  the  Great  Seal,  to 
Robert,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow  ;  Patrick,  Earl  of  Bothwell ; 
Andrew,  Postulate  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  Murray;  for 
negotiating  a  Marriage  betwixt  the  King  and  the  eldest  daughter 
of  the  King  of  England  ;  and  of  the  same  Date  is  a  Commission 
to  them  to  conclude  a  Peace  between  the  Kingdoms.  Book  13, 
Nos.  464,  465,  and  466.— Robert,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  pur 
chased  the  Lands  of  Cragrossy,  in  Strathearn,  from  John,  Lord 
Tempill,  24th  May,  1503;  and  the  27th  of  that  month,  he 
mortifies  these  Lands  for  maintenance  of  Chaplains  in  the  .  .  . 
.  .  of  Glasgow.  The  Mortification  is  Confirmed  the  last  of 
May,  1503.  G.S.B.  13,  Nos.  597  and  598. 

Robert  was  frequently  employed  in  the  public  transactions 
with  the  English,  and  particularly  in  1505.  He,  together  with 
Patrick,  the  Earl  of  Bothwell,  and  Andrew  Foreman,  Prior  of 
Pittenweem — [At  that  time  Elect  of  Moray.  See  Young's  Ac 
count  of  the  Marriage  of  James  IV.  and  Margaret,  in  the  Second 
Edition  of  Leland's  Collectanea,  p.  258] — did  negotiate  the 
Marriage  betwixt  King  James  IV.  and  Margaret,  eldest  daughter 
of  Henry  VII.,  which  has  proved  the  foundation  of  the  Union  of 
these  two  Kingdoms.  This  Bishop  Died  in  a  journey  to  the 


AHCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Holy  Land  in  1508  [Lcsly],  or,  as  the  Obituary  of  Glasgow  has  it, 
July  28  that  year. 

On  May  16th,  1508,  a  Scotch  Bishop,  dressed  in  a  Purple 
Doublet,  came  into  the  College  (at  Venice),  accompanied  by  Sir 
Lorenzo  Orio.  He  is  lodged  in  Canareggio,  and  is  come  on  his 
way  to  Jerusalem.  He  has  2000  Ducats  Revenue  ;  and,  having 
entered  ye  College,  sat  beside  ye  Doge,  and  presented  Letters  of 
credence  to  ye  Signory  from  his  King  (James  IV.),  and  from 
the  King  of  France.  He  delivered  a  Latin  Oration  in  favour  of 
this  State  and  of  ye  Doge,  and  of  his  King's  goodwill  to  ye 
Signory.  He  then  said  he  should  make  up  his  mind  as  to  going 
by  ye  Jaffa  Galley.  ...  On  the  Day  of  Ascension,  ye  Doge 
went  as  usual  in  the  Bucentaur  to  espouse  and  bless  ye  Sea,  with 
ye  Ambassadors  of  France,  Spain,  Milan,  and  Ferrara,  and  ye 
Scotch  Bishop.  [Sanuto's  Diaries.] 

In  the  List  of  the  Dead  at  Jaffa,  we  rind  "that  rich  Scotch 
Bishop,  the  King's  relation,  who  received  so  much  honour  from 
the  Signory  of  Venice." 

Laing,  also,  in  his  Edition  of  "  The  Works  of  John  Knox," 
vol.  vi.,  p.  GG3,  says — In  reference  to  the  death  of  Robert  Black- 
ader,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  I  may  refer  to  a  short  communica 
tion  which  I  read  to  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  in  1856.  Having 
obtained  some  Extracts  from  the  contemporary  Diary  of  the 
Venetian  Maria  Sanuto,  by  Rawdon  Brown,  Esq.,  the  allusion  to 
Blackader  as  the  "rich  Scottish  Bishop"  who  arrived  at  Venice 
in  May,  1508,  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem,  is  too  obvious  to  be 
mistaken.  But  the  same  Diary,  which  describes  his  honourable 
reception  by  the  Doge,  and  the  Latin  Oration  he  made  in  praise 
of  the  Seignory,  also  records  that  the 'Vessel  from  Jaffa,  in 
Palestine,  having  returned  to  Venice  in  November,  1508,  out  of 
the  36  Pilgrims  from  the  Holy  Land,  on  board  of  the  said 
Vessel,  this  "rich  Bishop"  was  one  of  27  who  Died  during  the 
voyage. 

Knox  mentions  Blackader  as  having  "departed  this  lyfe, 
going  in  his  superstitious  devotioun  to  Hierusalem ; "  and  Bishop 
Lesly,  who  styles  him  "  ane  noble,  wyse,  and  godlie  man," 


JAMES  BEATON.  517 

states  that  this  occurred  before  lie  came  "to  the  end  of  his 
journey;"  while  the  Obituary  in  the  Glasgow  Chartulary  assigns 
the  precise  Date  as  the  28th  of  July,  1508.  But  no  statement  is 
found  to  point  out  the  place,  or  under  what  circumstances,  the 
Bishop  Died. 

XXX.  JAMES  BEATON,     A.D.  1508-22, 

The  youngest  son  of  John  Beaton,  Laird  of  Balfour  in  Fife 
[Missive  Letter  of  Henry  Bethune,  Laird  of  Balfour,  to  Mr.  Keith], 
was  Provost  of  Bothwell  in  1503  [Bijincr],  Prior  of  Whithorn  and 
Abbot  of  Dunfermline  in  1504,  and  Treasurer  of  the  Kingdom  in 
1505.     In  1508,  he  became  Elect  of  Galloway,  but  before  he 
had  sat  one  year  in  that  See,  he  was  Translated  to  Glasgow,  at 
which  time  he  Resigned  the  Office  of  Lord  Treasurer.     He  was 
Consecrated  at  Stirling,  15th  April,  1509.    In  1515,  this  Bishop 
was  made  Lord  Chancellor ;  and  as  he  was  in  great  favour  with 
John,  Duke  of  Albany,  Regent  of  the  Kingdom,  he  got  likewise 
the  Abbacies  of  Arbroath  and  Kilwinning  in  commendam.     He  is 
Elect  of  Glasgow  in  1508,  and  next  year  Bishop.     [Reg.  Chart.} 
He  was  Archbishop  here  and  Chancellor  in   1515  and  1516. 
[Reg.  Chart,  et  Errol.  \     When  the  Governor  went  over  to  France 
in  1517,  the  Archbishop  of  Glasgow  was  made  one  of  the  Lords 
of  the   Regency;    but  discords  arising  among   them,   they   all 
thought  it  convenient  to  devolve  the  whole  power  upon  the  Earl 
of  Arran,  who  summoned  a  Convention  of  the  Nobility  to  meet 
at  Edinburgh  on  the  29th  of  April,  which  accordingly  was  done 
in  the  house  of  Archbishop  Beaton,  at  the  foot  of  Blackfriars' 
Wynd,  on  the  East  side,  over  the  Entry  of  which  the  Arms  of  the 
Family  of  Bethune  are  to  be  seen  to  this  day.     It  had  been 
resolved   beforehand  to   apprehend   the   Earl   of  Angus,   who, 
smelling  the  design,  sent  his  uncle,  the  famous  Gavin  Douglas, 
Bishop  of  Dunkeld,  to  the  Chancellor,  Archbishop  Beaton,  to  see 
to  get  differences  composed.     Though  the  Chancellor  was  deeply 
engaged  against  the  Earl  of  Angus,   yet   he  would  fain  have 
excused  himself,  and  laid  all  the  blame  upon  the  Earl  of  Arran  ; 
and  so  in  the  end  he  concluded  with  saying,  "  There  is  no 


518     AECHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

remedy,  upon  my  conscience  I  cannot  help  it ;"  and,  at  the  same 
instant  beating  on  his  breast  with  his  hand,  and  not  reflecting 
what  would  be  the  consequence,  a  Coat  of  Mail,  which  he  had 
under  his  Ecclesiastical  Habit,  returned  by  the  blow  a  rattling 
sound,  which  Bishop  Douglas  perceiving,  gave  his  brother  Bishop 
this  severe  reprimand — "How  now,  my  Lord,"  says  he,  "I 
think  your  conscience  clatters.  We  are  Priests ;  and  to  put  on 
armour,  or  to  bear  arms,  is  not  altogether  consistent  with  our 
character."  After  this  ensued  a  very  hot  skirmish  betwixt  the 
two  parties,  in  which  the  Earl  of  Angus  chanced  to  get  the 
better;  and  Archbishop  Beaton  seeing  the  day  lost,  fled  for 
sanctuary  to  the  Church  of  the  Blackfriars,  Edinburgh,  and  was 
there  taken  out  from  behind  the  Altar,  and  would  certainly  have 
been  slain,  had  not  Bishop  Douglas  interceded  for  him,  and  saved 
his  life.  [Buchanan,  and  Officers  of  State.}  He  possessed  the 
See  of  Glasgow  till  the  year  1522,  which  he  says  was  "con- 
secrationis  nostrae  14to"  [Cart.  Cambusk.],  and  was  then  Trans 
lated  to  the  Primacy  of  St.  Andrews.  During  his  residence  at 
Glasgow,  he  inclosed  the  Episcopal  Palace  in  that  City  with  a 
magnificent  Stone  Wall  of  Ashlar-work,  toward  the  East,  South, 
and  West,  with  a  Bastion  over  the  one  corner,  and  a  Tower  over 
the  other,  fronting  to  the  High  Street,  upon  which  were  fixed  in 
different  places  his  Coat  of  Arms.  He  augmented  the  Altarages 
in  the  Choir  of  the  Cathedral,  over  which  also  his  Arms  were 
affixed,  blazoned  in  proper  colours ;  and  he  likewise  built  or 
repaired  several  Bridges  within  the  Regality,  and  about  the  City 
of  Glasgow,  and  his  Arms  were  upon  them,  evidencing  his  public 
beneficence. — For  more  concerning  this  Prelate,  see  Scotichronicon, 
vol.  i.,  p.  245. 

XXXI.  GAVIN  DUNBAR,     A.D.  1524-47, 

Of  the  Family  of  Cumnock  [Beg.  Chart,  B.  25,  No.  99],  and 
nephew  to  Gavin  Dunbar,  Bishop  at  the  same  time  of  the  See  of 
Aberdeen  [Cart.  Cambusk.],  was,  about  1504,  Preferred  to  the 
Priory  of  Whitehern,  in  Galloway.  Being  a  person  of  polite 
letters,  he  was  pitched  upon  to  have  the  education  of  the  young 


GAVIN  DUNBAB. 


619 


King,  James  V.,  entrusted  to  him ;  and  he  managed  that  province 
so  well,  that  after  the  vacancy  of  the  See  of  Glasgow,  which 
followed  the  Translation  of  Archbishop  Bethune  from  this  See  to 
that  of  St.  Andrews,  the  Regents  of  the  Kingdom  did,  by  Letters 
Patent,  27th  September,  1524,  present  him  to  this  See  of  Glas 
gow;  and  on  the  22nd 
December  the  same  year, 
1524,  the  following  Gift 
is  to  be  seen  in  the 
Registers,  viz. — "  With 
full  power  and  faculty  to 
Gavin  D unbar,  Prior  of 
Whitehern,  and  Postulate 
of  Glasgow,  to  present 
whatsoever  qualified  per 
son  or  persons  to  all 
Benefices  that  shall  hap 


pen  to  vaik  within  the 
Kirk  and  Diocese  of  Glas 
gow,  injuring  the  time 
of  the  vacancy  of  the  See, 
which  was  pertaining  to 
the  King's  Presentation." 
[Officers  of  State,  p.  76.] 
He  was  Bishop  of  Glas 
gow,  anno  2a°  regis,  i.e., 
anno  Dom.  1524.  [Reg. 
Chart.1 


On  the  Seal,  beneath  a  Canopy  supported  by 
Spiral  Columns,  is  a  figure  of  S.  Kentigern,  with 

_ j       He  Was   Conse-    the  Nimbus,  holding  in  his  right  hand  the  Fish 

Crated    at   Edinburgh    On    with  Ri"g  in  its  mouth,  and  in  his  left  the  Crozier. 

K,I    ™  i  iro~        T  tlle  lower    part  is   a   Sllield'   bearing    three 

ary,  I0^0.          1    Cushions,  within  a  double  Tressure  flowered  and 

the   year  1526,  two  Wit-    counter-flowered.      Above    the    Shield    a    Cross 

nesses  are,  "  Gavino  epis-  l 

prmn       fll^o-non     "       nnrl  On  the  Couiltei' Seal  are  three  Cushions,  within 

^•>                l  a  double  Tressure  flowered  and  counter-flowered; 

"  Gavino   episcopo  Aber-  above  the  Shield  a  Cross  Bottonne,  and  below  it 

donen."    [Ibid.]    In  1526,  the  Fish.     A.D.  15S6.      [Morton  Charters.] 

this  Archbishop  was  one  of  the  Privy  Council,  and,  on  the  21st 
August,  1528,  was  made  Lord  Chancellor,     Gawand  was  Bishop 


520      ABCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

of  Glasgow  in  February,  1527-8.  [Mr.  Keith's  Appendix,  p.  4.1 
He  was  Bishop  and  Chancellor,  IGth  March,  anno  1528-9. 
[Peg.  Chart.]  He  was  Archbishop  and  Chancellor  the  16th  day 
of  February,  1531-2,  [Cart.  Alerd.],  as  he  also  was  May  25, 
A.B.  25,  i.e.,  1538.  "Mar.  He  is  still  "  Cancellarius  et  com- 
mendatarius  insulae  missarum"  (i.e.,  Inchaffray),  anno  1540; 
and  we  find  him  Bishop  anno  154G.  7?<v/.  Churt."' 

Gavin  Dunbar  was  son  of  Sir  John  Dunbar  of  Mochrum 
[Caledonia,  p.  G3\  brother  of  Archibald  Dunbar,  designed  of 
Baldoon,  and  nephew  of  Gavin  Dunbar,  Bishop  of  Aberdeen. 
[Dr.  George  Mackenzie's  Lires.]  His  grandfather,  Sir  Alexander 
Dunbar  of  West-field,  was  eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Moray ;  but, 
through  the  superior  influence  of  the  House  of  Douglas,  was 
declared  illegitimate,  on  account,  it  is  alleged,  of  his  mother 
having  been  within  the  degree  of  consanguinity  proscribed  by  the 
Canon  Law.  [Surrey  of  the  Province  of  Moray,  p.  '33. 

When  the  King  went  to  France  in  1530,  to  solemnize  his 
Marriage  with  Magdalen,  the  daughter  of  that  Crown,  his 
Majesty  left  the  Archbishop  one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Kegency 
during  his  absence ;  and  about  this  time  gave  to  him  the  Com- 
mendam  of  the  Abbey  of  Inchaffray.  In  the  Parliament  which 
sat  in  the  month  of  March  after  the  unfortunate  death  of  the 
King,  a  Bill  having  been  offered  by  the  Lord  Maxwell  for  a 
liberty  of  reading  the  Bible  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  and  the  Lords 
of  the  Articles  having  found  the  proposal  to  be  reasonable,  and 
allowed  it  to  be  read  in  full  Parliament,  the  Chancellor,  in  his 
own  name,  and  in  the  name  of  all  the  Prelates  of  the  Eealm  that 
were  present,  "  Dissented  thereto  simpliciter,  and  opponit  thame 
thereto,  unto  the  time  that  a  Provincial  Council  might  be  had  of 
all  the  Clergy  of  this  Realm,  to  advise  and  conclude  thereupon, 
gif  the  samyne  be  necessary  to  be  had  in  vulgar  tongue,  to  be 
used  among  the  Queen's  lieges,  or  not;  and  thereafter  to  show 
the  utter  determination  what  shall  be  done  in  that  behalf,  and 
thereupon  askit  instruments  "  [Rey.  ParL];  yet,  notwithstanding 
this  opposition,  the  Bill  was  passed  into  a  Law.  In  the  end  of 
this  year  (1543),  our  Prelate  was  turned  out  of  the  Chancellor's 
Office ;  and  now  he  got  leisure  to  build  the  stately  Gatehouse  at 


GAVIN  DUNBAB.  521 

his  Episcopal  Palace  in  the  City  of  Glasgow,  on  which  his  Arms 
are  engraven.  He  Died  the  last  day  of  April,  1547  [Gift  to 
the  Lord  SomerriU  in  the  Iteyisters],  and  yet,  by  the  Register  of 
Privy  Council,  "  Postulatus  Glasguen."  sits  in  Council  the  llth 
October,  1546.  He  was  Interred  in  the  Chancel  of  his  Cathe 
dral,  within  a  Tomb  he  had  caused  to  be  built  for  himself,  but 
which  is  now  so  quite  demolished  that  there  is  not  the  least 
vestige  of  it  remaining,  nor  can  so  much  as  the  place  be  shown 
where  it  stood. 

This  Bishop  is  shamefully  misrepresented  by  Mr.  Knox ;  but 
see  how  Mr.  George  Buchanan  thought  fit  to  describe  him  :— 

Praesulis  accubui  postquam  conviva  Gaviui, 

Dis  iion  invideo  nectar  ct  ambrosiam. 
Splendida  cocna,  cpulao  lautae,  ambitione  remote, 

Tetrica  Cecropio  scria  tincta  sale. 
Coetus  crat  Musis  nuniero  par,  ucc  sibi  dispar 

Doctriiia,  iiigcnio,  simplicitate,  fide. 
Ipsc  alios  supra  facundo  prorninet  ore, 

Qualis  Castalii  praeses  Apollo  cliori. 
Sermo  crat  aethcrci  dc  majcstatc  tonantis, 

Ut  tulerit  nostrac  conditions  onus  ; 
Ut  neque  concrctam  divina  potcntia  labem 

Hauserit  in  fragili  corporo  tccta  liominis  : 
Nee  licet  in  servi  dominus  descenderit  artus, 

Naturam  cxucrint  membra  caduca  suam. 
Quisquis  adest,  dubitat,  scliolane  immigrant  in  aulam, 

An  magis  in  mcdiam  vencrit  aula  scholam. 
Ju])iter,  /Ethiopian  coiivivia  solus  habeto, 

Duni  milii  concedas  praesulis  ore  frui ! 

Translation.— A&et  I  have  sitten  down  the  guest  of  Bishop  Gavin,  I 
envy  not  the  gods  their  nectar  and  ambrosia.  Where  the  supper  is  elegant 
the  fare  sumptuous  without  parade,  where  dry  and  grave  subjects  are  treated 
with  Attic  wit,  our  number  equalled  that  of  the  Muses  nor  was  it  unlike 
S em  in  learning,  talent,  candour,  and  fidelity.  The  host  himse  outstrips 
the  others  in  eloquence,  like  Apollo,  the  patron  of  the  Castalian  Band  His 
conversation  was  on  the  majesty  of  the  Divine  Person-how  He  bore  the 
burden  of  our  condition,  and' how  the  Divine  Power  drew  no  adhering  stain 
though  covered  with  the  frail  body  of  man;  nor  though  the  Loid  con 
descended  to  take  upon  Him  the  body  of  a  servant,  did  His  mortal  frame 
change  its  usual  nature.  Every  one  present  doubts  whether  lie  is  removed 
omba  ScLoTto  a  Court,  or  ratler  whether  the  Court  has  not  come  tc >  the 
midst  of  a  School.  Let  Jupiter  keep  to  himself  the  lea  s  c »f  the  Eth 
opians,  provided  you  allow  me  to  enjoy  the  conversation  c 

Two  Sculptured  Stones,  represented  in  the  following  Out,  con- 


ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 


stitute  the  only 
remains  of  the 
Gatehouse  to  the 
Episcopal  Palace 
of  Glasgow,  and 
measure  together 
7  feet  in  length, 
and  about  3|-  feet 
in  breadth  across 
the  lower  Stone, 
the  upper  portion 
of  which  contains 
the  Insignia  of 
Archbishop  Dim- 
bar.  These  are  on 

\  a  heater  -  shaped 
Shield— three  Cu 
shions  within  the 
double  Tressure  of 
Scotland,  being 
the  Arms  of  Ran- 

J  dolph,  Earl  of 
Moray,  assumed 

{  by  the  Family 
of  Dunbar  subse 
quent  to  the  Mar 
riage  of  the  son  of 
the  Earl  of  March 
to  the  daughter  of 
the  former.  Stu 
art,  the  Author  of 
"  Views  and  No 
tices  of  Glasgow 
informer  Times," 
in  noticing  this 
Coat,  speaks  of  a 

REMAINS    OF   GATEHOUSE   OF   EPISCOPAL   PALACE.  71  r     77     , 

[Inserted  in  Back  Wall  of  Premises  occupied  by  John  Millar 

&  Son,  Drapers,  22  High  Street,  Glasgow.]  ing       the         Centre 


GAYIX  DOBAE.  523 

space  between  the  three  Cushions,  a  fact  which  there  is  no 
reason  to  doubt,  the  place  where  this  figure  has  scaled  off  being 
readily  distinguishable.  Behind  the  Arms  is  a  Crozier,  or  Arclii- 
Episcopal  Cross ;  underneath  the  Shield,  curved  in  the  line  of  its 
base,  occurs  the  Salmon  with  the  Ring. 

The  nether  Shield,  which  in  shape  resembles  the  former, 
bears  a  Chevron  Cheque  between  two  Martlets-in- chief  respecting, 
and  one  in  Base ;  a  Rose  or  Cinquefoil  occupying  the  middle 
chief  point,  being  the  Arms  of  James  Houston,  Sub-Dean  of  the 
Chapter,  who  is  described  by  M'Urc  as  a  "learned  man."  Like 
Dunbar,  he  acquired,  his  education  at  the  University  of  Glas 
gow.  In  1523,  he  was  Vicar  of  Eastwood,  and  Witness  to  an 
Instrument  by  Gavin,  the  Archbishop,  confirming  certain  Privi 
leges  to  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Glasgow.  [Note  lij  Mr.  H. 
Laing.\  As  Incumbent  of  the  Rectory  of  Monkland,  he  appears 
to  have  been  Sub-Dean  of  Glasgow  prior  to  the  year  1527,  and 
as  such  wras  present  when  doom  was  pronounced  against  Patrick 
Hamilton.  Spnttisn-oode's  Hist.  Cli.  Scot.,  p.  G3.]  In  1530  he 
founded  the  Collegiate  Church  at  S.  Thenaw's  Gate  (Trongate), 
which  was  Dedicated  to  the  Virgin  Mary  and  S.  Anne.  [Orig. 
P(ir.  Scot.]  He  was  Rector  of  the  University  of  Glasgow  in 
1534,  in  which  Office  he  continued  by  Re-election  till  1541. 
M'Ure's  Hist,  of  Glasg.,  p.  236.]  He  Died  in  1550.  (New 
Hist,  of  Glasg.,  li/  J.  13.,  Scnex,  cC-c.] 

James  Houston's  Seal  is  described  by  Mr.  H.  Laing  at  p.  77 
of  his  "  Catalogue  of  Ancient  Scottish  Seals."  On  it  a  Cinquefoil 
is  plainly  represented  :  the  Sculpture  presents  more  of  the 
appearance  of  a  Rose.  In  ancient  Armoury,  however,  the  Rose 
and  Cinquefoil  were  not  distinct  figures. 

Under  each  Shield  is  placed  a  Scroll :  neither  are  Inscribed. 
At  each  side  of  the  Shields  is  a  rudely-formed  Pillar,  that  on  the 
left  being  broken  about  the  centre  of  the  upper  division.  On 
the  upper  Stone  are  represented  in  high  relief  the  Royal  Arms  of 
Scotland,  encircled  with  a  Collar  of  Thistles,  supported  by  two 
Unicorns  mounting,  denuded  of  their  heads,  the  tails  of  which  are 
disposed  in  a  manner  not  expressive  of  courage.  The  lower  limbs 
of  these  Figures  rest  on  a  kind  of  plane,  projecting  over  the 


521  AliCIIBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOAY. 

Columns  and  Figures  of  the  inferior  Sculpture,  probably  expres 
sible  by  the  architectural  term  "plinth." 

It  may  be  remarked,  that  the  earliest  authentic  occurrence  of 
the  Unicorn  in  Scotland,  connected  with  the  Monarchy,  is  on 
the  Coins  of  James  III.,  where  it  is  represented  supporting  the 
Regal  Coat  from  behind.  Under  the  Royal  Arms  in  this 
Sculpture  appears  a  diminutive  Escutcheon,  which  seems  to 
contain  the  letter  I  and  figure  5,  obviously  referring  to  the  style 
of  the  reigning  Monarch.  The  upper  portion  of  the  Stone,  which 
contains  the  Mantling,  and  underneath  the  remains  of  the  National 
Crest,  displays  the  Imperial  Helmet  surmounted  with  the 
Diadem,  and  bears  evidence  of  the  dilapidation  produced  by  time. 
The  Lion  composing  the  principal  Figure  of  the  Charge,  it  will 
be  observed,  is  represented  with  full  face—  rampant  </ar<lant,  as 
expressed  in  Heraldry.  iNisbct  terms  the  Royal  Beast  in  this 
position  a  Lion-Leopardee.  Ancient  and  Modern  T.st'  of' Armouries, 
Edin.  1718,  p.  1G3.1  This  Coat  has  been  idly  supposed  to  be 
the  Insignia  of  James  V.,  as  a  Dignitary  of  the  Cathedral.  There 
is  evidence  to  show  that  this  Monarch's  immediate  Predecessor, 
James  IV.,  held  Office  as  a  Canon  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of 
Glasgow  [Orif/.  Par.  Scot.,  rol.  /.,  p.  11;,  and  the  former,  we 
read,  was  Bailiff  or  Steward  of  Melrose  under  the  Abbot  [Charter 
in  r-iib.  Arch.  Edin.],  but  had  not  any  connexion  with  the  See 
of  Glasgow,  unless  in  so  far  as  his  Benefactions  to  the  Blackfriars 
or  Dominican  Convent  may  be  held  as  qualifying  the  negation. 

In  1755  the  Magistrates  of  Glasgow,  in  the  exercise  of  a 
doubtful  right,  granted  permission  to  remove  certain  portions  of 
the  Castle  structure,  to  aid  in  the  erection  of  the  Saracen's  Head 
Inn  [Private  Memoranda  lij  licid] ;  and  about  this  time  the  Sculp 
tures  exhibited  in  the  foregoing  Cut  passed  into  the  hands  of  a 
Citizen  named  Charles  Salkirk,  and  were  subsequently  built  into 
the  Wall  of  the  Tenement  in  which  they  are  now  contained.  To 
this  circumstance  the  Date  and  initial  letters  |pj  placed  on  a 
small  Tablet,  over  the  upper  stone,  plainly  refer. 

Of  the  Remains  of  Archbishop  Dunbar,  discovered  in  1855, 
during  the  repairs  executed  within  the  Choir  of  the  Cathedral, 


GAVIN  DUXBAi:.  525 

some  account  may  here  be  not  without  interest.     The  Sarcopha 
gus  of  this  Prelate  was  found  about  2  feet  from  the  surface  of 
the  Pavement,  in  one  of  the  hollows  formed  by  the  zYrches  of  the 
Crypt  which  supports  the  Basement  of  the  Choir,  and  between 
two   Pillars  immediately   South  of  the   present   Pulpit,    which 
stands  on  the  spot  formerly  occupied  by  the  High  Altar.     It  was 
disposed  in  the  usual  manner,  from  West  to  East,  and  consisted 
of  sundry  pieces  of  dressed  Freestone,  some  of  which,  laid  flat, 
formed  the  bottom  of  the  Coffin ;  others,  set  up  on  edge,  com 
posed  the  ends  and  sides.     Over  these,  in  the  form  of  a  Cover, 
was  placed  a  sheet  of  Lead  about  one-eighth  of  an  inch  in  thick 
ness,  and,  above  this  Covering,  another  of  dressed  Flags,  corre 
sponding  to  those  already  described,  the  whole  being  cemented 
together  with  Mortar.     The   Sarcophagus  contained  an  entire 
Skeleton   in   a    state   of  perfect  preservation.     These   Remains 
having  been  omitted  to  be  replaced  in  the  Cist  before  it  was 
finally  covered  up,  were  subsequently  deposited  in  a  hole  dug  for 
their  reception  at  the  foot  of  the  Steps  leading  from  the  great 
Western  Entrance  into  the  Cathedral.     Within  the  Sarcophagus 
were  found  a  Border  and  Fringe  of  rich  Gold  Tinsel,  on  which 
appeared    a  Figure  resembling  a   Quatrefoil,   which,  on   being- 
exposed  to   the   atmosphere,   fell  to   powder ;  and,   covering   a 
portion  of  the   Skeleton,  the  remains   of  a  fringed  Silk  Vest 
ment,  presenting  a  brownish  appearance,  portions  of  which,  with 
a  Cast  from  the  Skull  found  within  the  Cist,  were  presented  to 
the  Museum  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  Edinburgh,  by  <J.  C. 
Roger,  Esq.     Adhering   to    other   parts   of  the   Skeleton  were 
pieces   of  Waxed   Cerecloth,   anciently  used  in  the  process  of 
embalming.     The  length  of  the  Coffin  inside  was  6  feet  2  inches. 
With  reference  to  the  question  of  identity,  it  is  stated,  on  the 
authority  of  Keith,  that  Dunbar's  Remains  were  deposited  in  a 
Tomb  erected  by  himself,  "  within  the  Chancel  of  his  Cathedral." 
If  we  keep  in  view  this  fact  in  relation  to  another,  viz.,  the 
Inhumation  of  the  Protestant  Archbishop  Boyd  in  1578,  of  whom 
Spottiswoode  records  that  he  "was  solemnly  Buried  in  the  Quire 
of  the  Cathedral"  "in  the  Sepulchre  of  Mr.  Grawan  Dunbar," 
the  matter  will  presently  become  very  distinct.     [Hist.  Church 


:>'2C>      AUCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

Scot.,  p.  303.  This  Tomb  was  ransacked  at  the  commencement 
of  the  present  Century  (about  1804),  by  an  adventurous  young 
man,  afterwards  the  well-known  Bailie  Archibald  M'Lellan,  who, 
with  some  of  his  companions,  under  night,  effected  an  entrance 
into  the  Interior  of  the  Cathedral,  the  object  of  attraction  being 
the  Sarcophagus  of  Archbishop  Boyd,  disclosed  on  the  previous 
day  during  the  alterations  then  in  progress.  The  following 
information  is  given  on  the  authority  of  a  Gentleman  who  was 
conversant  with  the  leading  facts,  Mr.  James  Bogle,  Writer  :— 
"The  Foundations  of  the  Tomb  then  discovered  and  removed, 
measured  some  10  to  13  feet  square  inside,  within  the  Southern 
Wall  of  which,  not  far  from  the  surface,  was  placed  the  Coffin  of 
Archbishop  Boyd,  bearing  his  Arms  and  Initials ;  and  over 
against  the  opposite  Foundation,  nearly  on  a  line  with  the  centre 
of  the  two  Pillars,  on  the  left  hand  side  of  the  Pulpit  (rather 
nearer  the  Cathedral  Wall),  another  Coffin  of  Pavement  Stones, 
which  was  left  undisturbed.  In  the  empty  space  between  the 
two  Coffins  some  loose  Bones  were  dug  up ;  but  no  other  Coffin, 
or  anything  in  the  shape  of  a  separate  Interment."  It  will  thus 
1)0  seen  that  the  principal  facts  of  both  discoveries  are  recipro 
cally  verilied.  The  position  of  Archbishop  Boyd's  Coffin,  from 
which,  on  the  previous  occasion,  the  Skull  had  been  abstracted, 
having,  in  relation  to  the  latter,  been  sufficiently  ascertained. 
It  is  affirmed  that  Bailie  M'Lellan  also  visited  the  Tomb  of 
Bishop  Wischard,  in  the  Crypt  of  the  Cathedral,  performing 
similar  sacrilegious  acts.  './.  C.  Hour's  Paper.  Soc.  Ant.  Scot.] 

On  the  Death  of  Archbishop  Dunbar,  Alexander  Gordon, 
brother  to  the  Earl  of  Huntly,  was  chosen  in  his  room,  but 
Resigned  the  Office  in  1551,  and  was  immediately  succeeded  by 
Beaton.  [Preface,  p.  Hi.,  lie;/.  Epis.  Glas</.<  Beaton  was  at  that 
time  in  his  27th  year,  and  was  not  yet  Ordained.  He  was  raised 
to  the  Four  Minor  Orders,  and  Ordained  Sub-Deacon  at  Rome 
on  the  16th  July,  1552 ;  on  the  17th  and  20th,  he  was  Ordained 
Deacon  and  Priest ;  and  on  Sunday,  the  28th  August,  he  was 
Consecrated  Bishop.  [Gmb's  EccJ.  Hist.,  vol.  ?'/.,  p.  31.] 


JAMES  BEATON, 


527 


XXXII.  JAMES  BEATON.     A.D.  1551. 

James  Beaton,  or  Bethune,  was  the  son  of  James  Beaton  of 
Balfarg,  who  was  the  second  son  of  seven  of  John  Bethune  of 
Balfour    'Missive    Letter, 
Henry   Bethune,   now    of 
Balfour,  to  Bishop  Keith, 
already  mentioned.]     He 
was  first  Chanter  of  the 
Church   of  Glasgow,   and 
afterwards,    in    the    year 
15-13,   got   the  Abbey    of 
Aberbrothock,    which    he 
held  until  the  year  1551, 
when  he  was  Preferred  to 
the  See  of  Glasgow,  after 
a   Dispute    between    him 
and    Alexander    Gordon, 
brother   to    the    Earl    of 
Huntly,  whom  the  Chapter 
had    Elected.      But    the 
matter  being  compromised 
at  Rome,  the  Pope  made 
Mr.  Gordon  Titular  Arch 
bishop  of  Athens ;  and  the 
Earl  of  Arran,  Regent  of 
the    Kingdom,    Conferred    — -D,  - 

,.  '  .  -,          .        «    niche  is  a  Shield  quarterly,  Beaton  and  Balfour; 

on  him  the  Bishopric  01 
the  Isles,  as  being  the  first 
which  fell  vacant,  together 
with  the  Abbacy  of  Inch- 
affray.     Mr.  Bethune  was 
Consecrated  at   Rome  in 
1552,  and  held  the  See  of 
Glasgow  to  the  year  1500. 
perceivin^  the  wild  fury  of  the  Reformers,  by  pulling  down  of 
Churches  and  Monasteries,  deemed  it  the  most  prudent  course, 


On  the  Seal,  beneath  a  domed  Canopy,  is  a 
figure  of  S.  Kentigern,  with  the  Nimbus,  and 
vested,  holding  in  his  right  hand  the  Fish  and 
Hiii"  and  in  his  left  the  Crazier.  In  the  lower 


Shield  a  Cross  Bottonn(;, 

On  the  Counter  Seal  is  a  Shield  quarterly,  as 
in  tho  last;  at  the  side  the  Initials  "I.  B." 
Above  the  Shield  is  a  Cross  Bottonne,  and 
beneath  it  tho  Fish  and  lling.  On  a  Scroll 
surrounding  the  Shield  is  the  Inscription— 
"FERENDUM  VI  ...  AS."  I?)  A.D.  15(>(>.  [Morton 

Charters.] 

At  which  time  this  wise  Prelate, 


528      ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

for  the  preservation  of  the  Acts  and  Records  of  his  Church,  to 
transport  them  out  of  this  Kingdom.  And  accordingly  he  took 
the  opportunity,  and  went  away  into  France,  with  the  forces  of 
that  Nation,  that  same  year,  and  carried  along  with  him  all  the 
Writs  pertaining  to  the  See  of  Glasgow,  all  which  he  carefully 
deposited,  partly  in  the  Scots  College,  partly  in  the  Chartcr- 
House,  or  Monastery  of  Carthusians,  in  Paris.  This  Prelate  was 
appointed  by  Queen  Mary  as  her  Ambassador  at  the  Court  of 
France;  and  her  son,  King  James  VI. ,  continued  him  in  the 
same  character,  notwithstanding  their  difference  in  Religious 
sentiments.  He  behaved  himself  always  with  much  fidelity  and 
discretion,  and  King  James  did  much  regret  his  Death,  which 
fell  not  out  till  the  24th  of  April,  1008,  in  the  8f>tli  year  of  his 
age,  at  which  time  his  Majesty  was  on  his  way  to  London  to  take 
possession  of  the  English  Throne.  By  the  Bishop's  last  Will, 
he  bequeathed  the  large  sum  of  80,000  Livres  to  the  Scots 
College  at  Paris,  and  so  is  justly  looked  upon  as  its  second 
Founder.  [Keith.] 

The  first  Foundation  of  this  College  (which  must  not  be  con 
founded  with  the  Scots  College  at  Ptome)  was  in  1326,  by  David, 
Bishop  of  Moray. 

When  the  French  Revolution  threatened  destruction  to  all 
Records,  and  especially  those  of  Monarchy  and  Priesthood,  the 
poor  Brethren  of  the  Scots  College  were  not  found  well  fitted  to 
resist  the  storm.  Before  the  Inmates  fled,  Alexander  Gordon 
(then  Principal)  packed  up  in  barrels  whatever  seemed  most 
valuable,  including  many  MSS.  A  quantity,  however,  were  left 
in  the  College,  and  from  these,  Abb*'-  Paul  M'Phersou,  at  Alex, 
limes'  desire,  selected  some  which  he  carried  to  Scotland,  among 
which  were  the  two  Volumes  of  the  Original  Chartulary  of  Glas 
gow.  These,  with  a  quantity  of  other  Papers,  eventually  fell 
into  the  excellent  keeping  of  Bishop  Kyle,  at  Preshome,  Enzie, 
Banffshire. 

The  Tomb  of  James  Beaton  is  in  the  Church  of  S.  Jean  de 
Lateran  at  Rome,  with  the  Inscription,  "  Sacratus  Romse  1552; 
Obiit  24  April  1603,  setatis  suse  86."  Above  the  Tomb  is  Tali 
et  rid,  and  beneath  it  these  Verses  :- 


JOHN  POETEEFIELD.  529 

Prassul  et  orator  fuerat  qui  rnaximus  orbis 

.(Etate  hoc  parvo  marmore  contegitur. 
Quinquaginta  unum  praasul  transegerat  annos  ; 

Quadraginta  duos  regia  jussa  obiit. 
Sex  vidit  reges  Gallorum,  quique  secutus 

Orator  patriot  pra?fuit  usque  sua?. 
Est  voto  fruitus  Scotos  Anglosque  sub  uno 

Unius  Scoti  viderat  iinperio. 
Illud  restabat  voluit  quod  utrosque  sub  unum 

Diving  legis  mittier  imperium : 
Quodque  suum  voluit  regem  venerarier,  et  mors 

Fertur  in  hoc  uno  praecipitasse  senem. 
Ille  oratorum  quos  Scotia  sola  superbos 

Misit  ad  Heroas  ultimus  exstiterat. 
Ultimus  illorum  quos  Magna  Britannia  favit 

Secta  exturbavit  devia  pra3sul  erat. 

Translation.— A.  Bishop,  and  the  greatest  Diplomatist  of  his  age,  lies 
under  this  small  marble  [Monument] .  51  years  of  his  life  he  spent  as  a 
Bishop  ;  for  42  he  executed  the  King's  behests.  He  saw  six  Kings  of  France, 
and  the  Diplomatist  that  succeeded  him  rose  to  the  government  of  his 
Country.  He  had  his  wishes  realized — he  saw  the  English  and  Scots  under 
the  undivided  government  of  a  single  Scotchman  :  it  only  remained  that  he 
wished  both  Nations  to  be  put  under  the  one  authority  of  Divine  appoint 
ment,  and  that  he  wished  his  King  to  reverence  it ;  and  death  is  said  to  have 
hastily  carried  off  the  old  man  while  intent  on  this  object  alone.  He  was 

the  last  of  the  Deputies  whom  Scotland  alone  sent  to  the  haughty  Chiefs 

the  last  of  those  Bishops  whom,  tho  Great  Britain  favoured,  a  heretical 
Sect  exterminated. 


THE    REFORMATION. 

XXXIII.  JOHN  PORTERFIELD;     A.D.  1571-2.     Tulchan. 

After  the  new  form  of  the  Eeforrnation  was  established  in  this  King 
dom,  and  the  Regular  Clergy  turned  out  of  their  Possessions,  the  Eeforming 
Party  made  one  John  Porterfield  a  kind  of  Titular  Bishop  of  Glasgow,  for 
to  enable  him  to  convey  away  the  Benefice  of  that  Church  with  some 
appearance  of  Law.  He  is  designed  "Johannes  archiepiscopus  Glasg."  in 
1571,  when  he  consents  to  the  alienation  of  the  Manse  of  the  Eectory  of 
Glasgow,  by  the  Eector,  Mr.  Archibald  Douglas,  to  Thomas  Crawford  of 
Jordanhill,  and  Janet  Ker,  his  spouse,  20th  October,  1571;  which  he 
(Crawford)  again  sold,  in  1587,  to  Eobert,  Lord  Boyd,  and  Dame  Margaret 
Colquhoun,  his  spouse.  He  continued  only  till  1572. 

XXXIV.  JAMES  BOYD.     A.D.  1572-81.     Tulclian. 

In  the  year  1572,  during  the  Earl  of  Mar's  Eegency,  a  new  kind  of 

VOL.  II.  3  X 


TULCHAN  BISHOPS. 


Episcopacy  having  been  set  up,  Mr.  Jaines  Boytl  of  Trochrig,  a  very  worthy 
person,  received  the  Title  of  the  See  of  Glasgow;  and  he  exercised  the 
Office  of  particular  Pastor  at  the  Cathedral  Church,  the  Barony  of  Glasgow 
being  then  the  Parish  that  pertained  to  that  Church.  This  Bishop  Boyd 
was  the  second  son  of  Abbot  Boyd  of  Pinkhill,  brother  to  Eobert,  Master  of 
Boyd,  who  was  father  of  Robert,  sixth  Lord  Boyd.  When  the  legality  of 
the  Episcopal  function  came  to  be  first  called  in  question  by  the  Assembly 
in  1578,  he  learnedly  and  solidly,  both  from  Scripture  and  Antiquity, 
defended  the  lawfulness  of  his  Office  ;  yet  the  animosities,  which  he  then 
perceived  to  be  in  the  hearts  of  a  great  many,  so  far  impaired  his  health 
that  he  Died  in  June,  1581.  [Gift  of  his  SOII'N  Ward,  licijister  of  the  Prin/ 
Seal,  in  1582.]  His  son  was  the  learned  Mr.  Eobert  Boyd  of  Trochrig, 


On  the  small  Seal  is  a  Shield  with  a  Fess  Cheque  of  four  Tracts.  Above 
the  Shield  is  an  open  Book.  A.D.  1577.  [Morton  Charters.] 

On  the  large  Seal  is  a  figure  of  S.  Kcntigern,  holding  the  Fish  and  Ring  in 
his  right  hand,  and  the  Crazier  in  his  left.  The  Shield  in  the  lower  part  is 
charged  with  a  Fess  Cheque,  and  a  Cross  Crosslet  Fitchee  in  base.  A.D.  1581. 
[Glasgow  College  Charters.] 

Professor  of  Divinity,  first  at  Saumur,  in  France,  and  afterwards  at  home, 
both  in  Glasgow  and  Edinburgh,  and  he  wrote  a  Commentary  upon  the 
Ephesians.  He  was  Principal  of  Glasgow  College.  He  was  Buried  in  the 
Choir  of  the  Cathedral,  and  laid  in  the  same  Sepulchre  with  Bishop  Gavin 
Dunbar.  His  Tomb  was  ransacked  in  1804  (page  52G.)  [See  the  full 
account  given  of  this  Tulchan  Archbishop  in  Wo/Iron-'*  Fiinyraphical  Collec 
tions,  vol.  i.  Maitland  Club.] 

XXXV.  ROBERT  MONTGOMERY.     A.D.  1581-5.     Tulchan. 

After  Bishop  Boyd's  Death,  King  James  VI.  gave  Mr.  Robert  Mont 
gomery,  Minister  at  Stirling,  the  Bishopric  in  1581,  upon  the  recommenda 
tion  of  the  Duke  of  Lennox,  on  purpose  that  the  Duke  might  get  disponed 


WILLIAM  EESKINE.  581 

to  _  him  _  the  Benefice  by  this  Titular  Archbishop.  But  Mr.  Montgomery 
being  frightened  with  the  threatening  of  the  Censures  of  the  Church,  if  he 
did  not  purge  himself  of  the  unlawful  Office  of  a  Bishop  in  his  own  person 
(as  was  the  language  at  that  time),  he  surrendered  the  Archbishopric,  and 
afterwards  became  Minister  at  Symington,  in  Kyle,  in  1587,  where  he  was 
reduced  to  great  misery.  Mr.  Montgomery  gave  bond  to  Lennox  that  he 
should  dispone  to  this  Duke  and  his  Heirs  all  the  Income  of  his  See,  how 
soon  he  should  be  admitted  Bishop,  for  the  yearly  payment  of  £1000  (Scots), 
with  some  Horse-Corn  and  Poultry.  [Hay's  MS.]  And  this  Author  adds 
Duke  of  Lennox's  Agents  having  possessed  themselves  of  the 
Bishopric  Montgomery  resigned  his  Title  in  favour  of  Mr.  William  Erskiiie, 
rarson  ot  Campsie,  a  follower  of  the  Earl  of  Mar 


XXXVI.  WILLIAM  EESKINE. 
A.D.  1585-7. 


After   Archbishop    Mont 
gomery's  surrender,  the  King 
gave   the   Revenue   and    the 
Title  to  Mr.  William  Erskine, 
Parson  of  Campsie,  and  Com- 
inendator  of  Paisley,  which  he 
had  gotten  after  the  forfeiture 
of  Lord  Claud  Hamilton,  iu 
1585.    The  Provision  is  Dated 
December  21,  1585.    [Kiddle's 
MS.  XutcH.]    Mr.  Erskine  was 
never  in  Orders,  and  a  Titular 
Bishop  only.      In   less  than 
two  years,  viz.,  in  the  year 
1587,  the  King  took  away  the 
Archbishopric  from  Mr.  Er 
skine,  and  gave  it  to  Walter, 
Commendator    of    Blantyre, 
with  power  to  Feu  out  the 
Lands  ;  who  did  accordingly, 
in  the  year  1588,  Feu  out  the 
whole    Barony   of    GlasgOAv, 
mostly  to  the  old  Rentallcrs, 
turning  the  real  Rent  into  a 
Feu-Duty.      The   Charter  is 
Dated  3rd  November,  1587  : 
Ratified  1st  February,  159L 
He    was  made    Treasurer  of 
Scotland,   6th  March,   1595  ; 
Lord  Privy  Seal,  and  one  of 
the   Octavians  for  managing 
the  King's  Revenue  and  Ex 
chequer,  9th  January,  1595. 
[Kiddle's  MS:  Notes.] 


On  the  Seal  is  S.  Kentigern,  vested,  holding  the 
Fish  and  Ring  in  his  right  hand,  and  the  Crozier 
in  his  left.  The  Shield  in  the  lower  part  bears  on 
a  Pale  a  Buckle,  the  Arms  of  Erskine ;  above  the 
Shield  a  Cross  Bottonne. 

On  the  Counter  Seal  is  a  Shield  with  the  Arms 
of  Erskine,  as  in  the  last ;  beneath  the  Shield  the 
Fish  with  Ring;  at  the  sides  the  initials  '' V.  E." 
\Marr  Charters.! 


532  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  THE  SEE  OF  GLASGOW. 

XXXVII.  JAMES  BEATON.     A.D.  1588-1603. 

After  all  these  various  changes,  the  King  did,  by  Act  of 
Parliament,  restore  the  old  exauctorate  and  forfeited  Bishop 
Beaton  to  the  Temporality  of  the  See  of  Glasgow,  which  he  did 
enjoy  till  his  Death  in  April,  1603.  The  Lands  were  erected 
into  a  Temporal  Lordship  in  favour  of  Ludovick,  Duke  of 
Lennox,  7th  April,  1603— G.S.B.  44,  No.  365.  [Riddle's  MS. 
Notes. 


END    OF    VOLUME    II. 


GORDON,    J  F  S 

BQX 

OT  f  -\ 

AUTHOR 

Scotichronicon 

-clul 

.G67 
v.2 

TITLE 

ROOM 

Scotichronicon 


BQX 


.06? 
v.2 


